We jumped a bit ahead
in the book with the counter machine because
I really like that model. I wanted to get some homework on it. And now we'll go back
to going in order. So back to this question of how do we define what are all the
possible computations that can be done automatically? How do we do that? So this was a question that needed to be answered before
anybody could hope to. To tackle Hilbert's and guidance
problem asking whether there was an algorithm that could decide the truth in any
mathematical statement, we needed to define
what is an algorithm. What does that mean? Exactly? So here's one attempt that people made the so called
recursive functions. There's going to be a couple
of variants of these, but this was an early
attempt at defining this very slippery notion of what
does it mean for a function to be computable in the sense that a sufficiently well trained
person could sit down with pen and paper and figure
out what is its output given its input from a. So here was a notion that
was introduced really on how to build up functions for many integers
to one integer from scratch. So as we often do, we define some sort
of atomic functions, things that are quote,
obviously computable, very easy to compute. And these three functions
are the constant 0. So on input x, it just ignores x and output 0, the successor function on
input x and outputs x plus 1. And then projection, this is kinda needed in some
technical cases to say, if you're given several inputs, I just want to pick
one of the inputs out. So for example, P1 of any number
is just the identity function. Okay? So those are going to be
our only basic functions. And then now we'll have some, some ways to create new functions given that we've
already defined and computable. So let f and g be functions. So we're going to declare that their composition is
also a function, right? So what? If f can be defined
and G can be defined? And I'm being a little
bit slippery with exactly how many inputs
do they take here is I've said that
there's only one output. You can also define needs
to take several outputs. Or you can equivalently
consider that to be several functions that you
just evaluate independently. So let's just assume the
number of inputs and outputs work out here and its simplest at
this point to think of them all, I mean one input and one output. So then it makes sense
to give an input to, to G and output comes out of that. You give that output to IF and then some other
output comes out of that. And then that is the
composition of f with g. We declared that's computable. We allow this thing called
primitive recursion. And it works like this. You assume that you
have functions f and g. Again as in their computable. And you can use that to define a
new function recursively work. Essentially f gives you the base case and g gives
you the recursive case. So how does it work? Well, you imagine that H is
recursing on only its last him, but so it can take several inputs, but it's only doing
recursion on its last input. In other words, if
I want to know what is h of all these inputs comma 0, That's the base case
for the last input. I just evaluate f on the other
inputs and I get a base case. And then if I want to know what
is h and x comma y bigger than 0? Well, the idea is G can tell me that what I do is I
recursively evaluate h on the same non y input
x and then y minus one. So that's the recursive part. But then, you know, whatever comes out of that, I need to process it somehow. This is often the case when
you do a recursive algorithm, you, you get your returns of answer, then you process it based on
the information you have. So whatever value comes out to be g takes it along with
all the other inputs, x and y, and then figures out
what should the output of H. So note that the recursive case
is always one smaller on y. So this is guaranteed to reach the base case of HX to 0 eventually. Now a whole lot of
what we know, right? So these are the so-called
primitive recursive functions. And a whole lot of what
we know about these is due to the work of Rosa Peter, who was, I think was a
Hungarian mathematician. But they weren't defined by, or they're defined earlier, but we actually know quite
a bit about them now. So let's suppose that you
wanted to implement this. Here's some pseudocode for how you would implement this
recursive function a, H based on f and g, you would just look like this. Just to make it a
little more concrete. And if you want to do it iteratively,
this is how it would look. So you're going to have to
always translate this into a very straightforward
iterative pseudocode because of how regularly
them recursion works. It just evaluates age on the
first inputs are unchanged. The last one goes down. Okay, so let's look at some examples of primitive recursive functions. Prices. There's all, it's very abstract. So what they were trying
to do is to say, okay, what is the most bare bones
definition we can write down for which we can recover everything else
we know how to compute. So let's take some things
that aren't on this list. But then see can we define
them in terms of what's here? So first of all, do is addition. Addition can be
defined in this way as just using primitive recursion and composition together with
constant 0 and successor, right? So you can define add recursively
what we want to add of x, y intuitively to be
the value of X plus Y. So add of 0 is x. That's a base case. So this is assuming this F function that tells you
that f of x tells you the base, just the identity here. And then over here, what do we do? We say, well, add of x, y should be. What? Well, what you do is
you should figure out recursively what's add
of x, y minus one. That's one smaller. So take the successor of that. So in this case, the
g function that takes the recursive value and
then gives you back a, you know, the value you want
is just successor, right? And so here there's writing
it down in these terms. So add of 0 is just the
projection function. It just outputs its first implicated
in or it doesn't write out, it doesn't, it's not otherwise
based on the second, but Add an x, y is g of
x y and x y minus 1, where G is what? Well, gee, can be defined as first, project onto the third element. So g doesn't actually need x or y. Once you've got Add of XY minus
one, That's all it needs. So takes its three in both XYZ
just throws away the first two are just project onto the third and
then take the successor of that. So, so that shows addition
is primitive recursive. Okay, multiplication, we're
going to express similarly, its base case, multiplying x by 0 now is project under
the second input to 600. And the recursive
case is we evaluate, want to know what's x times y? Well, if we know what's
x times y minus 1, we know that that's what, that's
x smaller than x times y. So what do we have to do to that? To get it up to x times y, we have to add x to it, but we've already defined that. So this is how we can compose
the recursive case with something that's primitive
recursive and get multiplication. Exponentiation is similar. X raised to the 0 is one that can be defined with the constant 0
and the successor function. And then x raised to the y is recursively evaluate
x to the y minus one. And then that's not
quite what we need, but that times x would be x to the y. So we take that recursive case, multiply it by x. That's something we showed
is primitive recursive. So the whole thing is okay. So, so this was an early
attempt at defining stuff, and as you can see, it's a
bit cumbersome to work with. One of the benefits of hindsight is that now that we know
a whole lot about programming, there's actually a much more
simple characterization of these things in terms of progress languages that I
find to be very elegant, right? So the textbook calls this primitive programming
language glute, right? And then bloop program. I mean, there's still
pseudo-code, right? But you can imagine implementing
this as a subset of say, Python. So bloop programs, I like to say they have for-loops
but no while loops. Okay, Now, you, if you have a sufficiently
powerful programming language, I mean for, for loops can
do what while loops can do. So what I mean by FOR loops is using for-loops in the way that
you're supposed to use them. Meaning, rather than having some arbitrary condition you test
to know when to exit the loop, a while loop, you're
essentially counting, right? In other words, FOR loop should
be used like a loop that says, repeat the following y times, right? So in other words, before
entering any loop, we have to precompute how many total iterations
it's going to take, right? So instead of writing
it as a for-loop, I'll write it like
repeat the following y times to make it clear
that as you enter the loop, you have to know how many
times you're going to do it, and then that number doesn't
change while you're doing it. You're just going to do
this exactly y times. So this is a way to define add it
using this kind of loop, right? You start z1 and x, and then y times in a row, you incremented, that's
the successor function, and then you return Z1. Now, you can compose that. You can use that as a subroutine
to define multiplication. So essentially what you do
is to multiply x and y. You started Zip2 at 0 and
then y times in a row. You repeat this with
z1, you know, starting, starting to x each time, but z2 taking on the
value of Z1, you're done. You can define
exponentiation similarly by composing with multiplication. So both of these are sort of equivalent formulations of the primitive recursive functions. Now we're not going to prove that, we're not going to prove that
these two are equivalent. But it is a very nice
way to think about, you know, what is
primitive recursive mean? It means that you can implement
it in a programming language, but where are the only kind
of loops you're allowed to do are ones where as you enter them, you've already computed how many
times they're going to execute. So you can't have anything happening in the body of the loop effect. Whether you're going to
exit after that iteration or it's just fixed once
you start the loop, how many times it's going to execute.