Now, the three counters seemed
fairly necessary in that argument, but maybe, I don't know, maybe you could get by with
using only one counter to represent the whole Turing
machine configuration and therefore two counters
to manipulate it. And I don't know of any way to do
that in a straightforward way. But Minsky figured out
this very nice idea how to sort of simulate a Turing machine with
a two counter machine. Well, it actually, essentially
what we do is we can simulate three counter machine
with a two kind of machine. And then we know from
the previous slide, 3 counter machines can
simulate turning sheets. So how do we simulate a three counter machine
with a two counter machine? And the reason I say sort of as well, we're not going to represent
the values directly. If we have say, value
certain integers in the first two counters of
the three counter machine. Those integers aren't precisely what shows up in the
two counter machine. So it's a representational trick. So what you do here is if you're three kind of
machine has integers, ABC and they're all non-negative. Then R2, Katherine King will have one counter
that represents that, and then the other
one's a work counter. All right, so this one counter
or represent all three of these. And it does that by letting
that single counter x be two to the a times three
to the b times 5 with the C. Now, hopefully you
see how we could use this to simulate any number
of characters, right? For example, if we had
a five counter machine, what would be the other
numbers we'd have here to represent the two
other counters, right? So counters, let's say D and E. So pause and think about pad, right? So we would do, this would be this times seven to the d times 11 to D. So what we're using here is that every integer has a
unique prime factorization. So if I write down a single
number here and that number, What happens to be to have divisors
that are only 2, 3, and 5. Well then there's a unique value that each of the
exponent's could add. And so that's the sense in which that single number can
represent these three numbers. And it's going to be
convenient one for doing the operations we need to do. So, for example, we might
want to increment B. So pause, like hit the pause button, think about to increment B. How would you change the value x? What we want to change
this b to b plus 1. What does that do to
the whole number? Well, changing this B2B plus
1 takes the whole number, multiplies it by three, right? And multiplying by a
constant like three is something we know how
to do with just two. Just take x and you decrement it. For each time we decremented
you increment the counter three times and you do it till x gets to
0 and then push the value back. So you, you've tripled x. If we want to decrement
the counter, right? Then we divide by a constant, say to decrement a, we divide by two. To decrement C, we
would divide by five. And we can do that with similar
tricks to dividing by two. To test if c is positive.
What does that mean? Well, C is either positive or 0. If it's 0, then five
is not a divisor of x. If it's positive in
any positive number, then five is the divisor of x. So we want to test is x a multiple of five is
congruent to 0 mod 5. And again, we saw how to
test if x is even or odd. That idea extends pretty
straightforward laid a testing whether it's a multiple
of other numbers besides two. So if we want to start with our three counter machine
has its first counter, a is n and b, C are both 0. We would start with x
equals 2 to the n. So, so this is the sense in
which it's indirect. We're not starting with this thing having the input we
really want to give it. And we start with an encoding of n, where n is an exponent in this
exponentially bigger number. So because three counter machines can do turning universal computation, we can compute any function we want, including two to the n, right? So, but what that means is that if x, if f is any computable function, we can start with x equal to two to the input we want
to give to F called M and halt with x equal to 2 to
the f of n. But you might wonder, well, okay, but can we do a
more direct one if we have a computable function F, Can we just start with its input in the counter x and end with its
output in the camera tracks. And that was proven not to be true. So this sort of indirect encoding
is actually necessary here. So in fact, there is no two counter machine that can even compute this
encoding function, right? So there is no two kind of
machine that starts with n In its first counter and ends with two to the n
and its first camera. And in fact, the person who prove
this seemed almost upset about Minsky's result and
said, You know, when, when it was quoting the theorems of this kind of insulting thing about a counter machine can be
simulated by a two kind of machine provided an obscure
recoding is accepted. So they seem to be very
bothered that Minsky was claiming these things are Turing
universal because he thought, Well, wait now, to use them, you have to do this encoding. And this encoding is itself something that they're
not even able to do. So to him, it sort of
seemed like a lot of the work to set it up was
being done by the person, the program or less
to use the machine. But that said, tuna machines Canada universal
computation on encoded inputs, even though they cannot compute
the encoding themselves. But the fact that to
kind of machines can simulate arbitrary three
machines in this way implies that the halting problem for two counter machines
is undecidable. Sometimes people take that as like one possible definition of
what does it mean to say your, your model of computation
is really universal. It's really powerful. Sometimes they say, Well, if it has an undecidable
halting problem, that's an indication that it,
that it's pretty powerful. So one of the homework says
sometimes assigned is to show that one counter machines have a
decidable holding Brahma. So they're just unequivocally weaker. Okay, and then I want to end with this kinda nice idea
from the textbook. This is not as much about
terrain universality, but this will be useful for
homework I like to assign. So one way to think about a two
counter machine is that it's a finite automaton on the
play and not the whole plane, just the first quadrant. And not the real valued plane, the integer valued plane. So it's occupies a point x, y, both natural numbers. And one way to think about it is that I can't write
anything or see anything. It's a robot that can
just move around in here. But one thing you can do, the
consents if it's touching the wall on the bottom or the
wall on the left or both. Right? That's a corresponds
to reading is my counter, what first counter 0 or
is my second noun or 0? And it can move north,
south, east, west. That corresponds to
incrementing and decrementing encounters based on
its current state. And these two bits
telling it about the law. So this seems like a very
weak kind of robot. Randomly. You can't do anything except just tell them I up against a wall or not. But there's an automaton to the
following problem is undecidable. Given x, y, if you start the
atomaton at that position, all right, say if you started here, Will it ever visit the origin? I mean, it's like what it's
doing when it's not touching the wall just looks so
stupidly repetitive. And it seems like you
could easily decide this, but it's actually
undecidable to tell if you know the transition rules
that this thing has, is that ever going
to visit the origin?