All right, so one
might argue with this, there's a lot of interesting
theorems and entering the paper, but I included in the proof that the halting problem is not decidable. But I'm going to call this the most important theorem in the
theory of computing. And it, namely that there is a
universal Turing machine meeting. There's a Turing machine
that oninput Emax, where m is a description of a
Turing machine acts as a string. We can simulate hem events. And part of what made that, even though kind of a
universal functions were known to the people working on the
partial recursive functions. Part of what was important
about this is that it was very straightforward to prove
this somewhat tedious. You actually write down
all the transitions of a universal machine and yeah, I get, that gets a little tedious. But once you wrap your
head around the concept, it's very straightforward
to see that, that you could write a
machine that would just carry out simulating the transitions
of another machine. Much more easy to see then
with these other models, like the MMU recursive
functions and girdle, after seeing this, identified
this ease of simulation. And therefore the ease
with which you can prove the equivalence of other models or use diagonalization to show limitations on the model
has a kind of miracle. Now, part of what is so
convincing about the model as well is that it's extremely robust to choices in
the definition and terrain made. Some noted this that you can add one-way or
two-way infinite tapes. You could have many
tapes or just one. You can have two-dimensional tapes, multiple heads on a tape. All of these are kinds
of machines that can easily simulate each other. And so it's very
convincing that, okay, we stumbled on a fundamental
model here because it's not like it's not going to shatter if
we make one little change to it. Okay, so we started
off this whole chapter talking about great
unifications in science. So This was the great unification for computation that
happened in 1936, which is that a function is
computable by a Turing machine if and only if it's computable by any of these
other competing models that, that people are talking about. Now the rightmost equivalences
shown by church and cleaning. It was published in April 1936. Terrain submitted his paper. He heard about the problem. He knew nothing about what
anybody was doing over in the US. So he completely independently
submitted his paper, proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society and may 1936. While it was under review, he learned about boot this
work of church and cleaning. And he has sold an added approve of this leftmost equivalence to
the appendix of the paper. So he showed turing machines can simulate these and these can
simulate target machines. And then it was published
in 19 November 1936. And I just kinda want to draw your attention to the difference
between these dates here. Note that the first
transatlantic phone service was established in 1927. And yet somehow they were able
to publish journal paper is approximately eight times faster than we can today with the benefit. So I've never quite understood that. Now the skeptics, the
people who were skeptical of lambda calculus,
girdle, and posts, they were immediately
convinced by Turing's paper, in particular by his
physical arguments that this model captured
general computation. This idea of talking about what
does a person do when they sit down to do a mathematical
computation. They were very convinced that, yes, this captures anything you
could possibly mean by that. And it is straightforward using modern sort of
technology to show that all of these are equivalent
to programmability in flute or your favorite
programming language like Python. The so-called Church-Turing
thesis captures this intuition. And it's the statement that the universal Turing
machine can simulate any physical computing device that
can be finite lead described, where each step accesses and modifies a finite
amount of information. Okay, so I call this a thesis and not a theorem because this is not a
mathematical statement. In the middle here I talk about
physical computing device. What exactly does that mean? It means something you can
build in our physical universe. And because that's not
precisely defined, neither does is it precisely defined. What it means for a step
to access and modify it? Finite and information. So it's not a mathematical statement, it's a physical law, right? Just like any other physical law, the laws of thermodynamics. So it's open to refutation
in principle, right? We can't prove this
statement because we can't formalize what are physical
devices in the universe. But it's, we're fairly
convinced it's true. So by analogy, most attempts to build a perpetual motion
machine which would violate the second law
of thermodynamics. Well, they fail because they're actually increasing
entropy somewhere. That's not being
explicitly model by the, the description of the machine. So similarly, when you
see people attempting to refute the Church-Turing thesis
does happen occasionally. It's usually cracked pots. Once in a while, It's
respected scientists. But most attempts to
do this to describe a so-called super
terrain physical device. And there's this whole field
called hyper computation. This is what people think about and actually have conferences
on this stuff. Well, most of them, what they
do is they kinda fail for an analogous reason to try to
build a perpetual motion machine, which is that they smuggle somewhere in their definition
and infinite description. So for example, a neural net where
you imagine that the weights, rather than being 64 bit floating point numbers,
infinite precision. And you'll see people publishing
papers where they imagined o, if you can only program one of
the weights in a neural net to encode in its binary
expansion, the halting problem. We'll then that neural net could, could do sir, Super tearing things. But, you know, the statement is about physical the meeting
devices we can actually build. We don't have to program
like a resistor to have its resistance encode
the halting problem. We just have to get a finite
amount of information and do it. And so that's what the thesis.