Ackerman gave this counterexample to the conjecture that the
primitive recursive functions capture all the intuitively
computable functions. Because the Ackermann function
looks intuitively computable, just defined by this
fairly simple recursion t, It's a huge function, but, but it's a fairly
simple definition and it's not primitive
recursive crudely. So one can consider, now I actually don't know a lot about the history of those are
I don't know if this was developed in
response to that or not, but, but in any rate, one can consider adding
a new way to create new functions other than the ways a ladder and
primitive recursion. And it's technically called Mu recursion if it's actually doesn't look a whole very recursive today. But, but the idea is
that you have a function on several inputs and you single
out the last one, call it y. So x is a vector and y
is just one integer. You can define a new function
h called mu sub y of f. And what it's doing is
it's doing a search on the y. And essentially it's defined to be the minimum y that
makes f x y equal to 0. Right? So new recursive functions are then defined exactly the
same way as primitive recursion, allowing all these atomic
sort of functions, composition primitive or recursion. And then this new way to define a new function
called Mu recursion. Basically saying, oh, you're always allowed to define a new function. That is defined to be
the minimum value that, that to assign to the last input
to make the whole function is 0. So this somehow
corresponds to if you're going to implement this in
a programming language, if you have f somewhere that
takes all these inputs, h takes one fewer inputs. So it takes all the x's but
not the why it starts y at 0. Then while F.dr. Evaluates to
something other than 0 increments Y, and once it finds a
way that does this, it returns that one, right? So you can implement
this fairly easily. So this seems intuitively
to be something that should be allowed as a
way to build new functions. But no, such a y may
not exist, right? Primitive recursion is defined
so that the recursion sort of always terminates every primitive recursive function you write down. If you can write it down, it is, it has some well-defined
value on all possible inputs. But you can now write down functions defined with this mu recursion,
this minimum searcher. And there may be no value of
y that makes f evaluate to 0. So this, and if so does
this, why does it exist? That function is
undefined on the input x. And so mu recursive
functions may not be total, meaning they may not be
defined on all inputs. So mu recursive
functions can be total, but they don't have to be in when they're not there called partial. Partial function is one that's
not defined on all inputs. So sometimes these are also called the partial recursive functions, given that they, you know, they allowed the
functions to be partial. And mathematically a function that's
undefined on a certain input. If you want to think
about it algorithmically, this is going to correspond to a
program computing that function. But if you give it an input that is not defined on
the program won't hold. So, right, so, so
every Turing machine, every algorithm you can write down, computes some partial function just defined to be the one that's
only defined when halts, when it halts that, it's defined
to be whatever it outputs. So we have the various
classes of, you know, mathematically defined
functions on the left and then classes of algorithms that
can compute them on the right. The primitive recursive
functions are exactly the ones computable by
bounded loop programs. So these are total, and these programs are guaranteed
to halt and give an answer. And then way down here there's
the partial recursive functions and these correspond to what we now know to be intuitively what
is computable by any algorithm. So any free loop program or in more modern parlance,
any Python program. Now, there is this class
in the middle, right? And it turns out it is, It's nontrivially in the middle, which is those recursive functions, meaning those computable functions that are told they're
defined on every input. So in algorithmic terminology, there are computed by
programs that always hold. And you might think,
well, maybe those exact, maybe the set of functions
they can compute is exactly the primitive
recursive functions, right? But we're going to show
no, that's not true. The, the, the bounded
loop programs here, they're always
guaranteed to terminate, but they're not strong enough to hit every more general algorithm
that's guaranteed to terminate. So we'll show that here. And the in modern terminology we would say no total
programming language, meaning no programming
language that has the property that all of its
programs are guaranteed to halt can compute all the total
recursive functions mean all the functions that
are computable by some program that just
happens to always hold. Even though it's written in a
language where the language doesn't guarantee that
all the broker, right? So there's kind of a
crucial difference there. You can write a program in
Python that always holds. Python itself is not foreseen. All the programs to hold. It is possible to write programs
in Python that don't called. And so in some sense
you're just lucky or clever when you
write one that does. So bloop was a failed attempt to capture all the total
recursive functions, although computable functions
that are defined on every input, the Ackermann function,
the counterexample. It's computable but not by
any bounded loop program. But the question is, is there a more powerful programming language whose programs always Hall
just like bounded loop. But that unlike bloop, can actually compute all the
total recursive function. And we're going to argue
here the answer is no. And suppose all programs in some
language or tone, right there, hold on inputs and this is
enforced by the language just if you can write a syntactically
valid program in that language, it is guaranteed the whole. Suppose that's the way
the language works, which none of the languages you typically use like
Python or C plus, plus behave that way. Okay? So every language, every program you can write
in that language holds. So the universal function, right? For that language defined to be. Now this isn't necessarily
an algorithm and just defining a function takes two inputs, a program and that language
and an input for the program. And it's defined to be whatever
that program does on that. Now, all programs are well-defined on all inputs because they all hope you have some output. So this thing is well-defined. Read every program you can put air, every input you could put here. This has a well-defined value. So using you as a subroutine, we can define a new program V, right? And these gonna do this diagonalization type
of thing we've seen before, where V on input P, a program does the following. It runs piano input p.
It can do that because, you know, you sort of define air. So you can take as input
a program and run it, which is how you works, and then add one to it, right, by running you a PP. But if he did that, V on input B will be
undefined, right? So actually that's in some sense, if we assume that you could be implemented in this
programming language, well then V could be, but V can't be taught to write
V and V is undefined there. So it's not implementable, but it's perfectly easy to implement if you can
implement you that. Did you just do this one
step to use you to run p on its own source code isn't but add
one when you're done and return. So you cannot be implemented either. Right? So, so the punchline here is that the universal function
cannot be implemented. And a similar argument shows that
bloop has no universal program. You can't write a bloop
interpreter and blue. But in fact, this is true of any program programming language where all the programs
or guarantee adult.