We're going to jump ahead a
little bit in the textbook to a model that I really like at some homework problems on
it called counter machine. And this is another model of computation that
like a Turing machine, you think of as a
finite state machine with some unbounded memory provided. But it's a much more limited
looking kind of memory. There's just a fixed
number of what we call counters and each holds
a non-negative integer. So if we want to, so that the natural form of input to this sort of model
is natural numbers. So the way that we do that, that is we simply put the inputs we wanted to give
into some of the counters. And we have to assume we have
at least enough counters to hold all those inputs. And then all the other
ones start at 0. And that's kinda like
having a input tape and a work tape and attention. Okay, So this is a
finite state machine, but each state is one of
the following types, right? So each state is a command saying
to do one of these things. Increment a certain counters seek to like ink to name
increment counter number to decrement counter c.
And this has no effect. If C is already 0, it
can't be negative. You have a test for 0, right? So we're going to make
these lines of code. We can say, well, if a
certain counter is 0, then we'll jump to line i or state I. And we can also allow
an unconditional goto. Technically this one isn't needed. This can be a shorthand for having the if statement for some counter that you'd
never use for anything else. Now, what are these used for? Well, you can give it different semantics the same time
you have for Turing machines, they can have accept
or reject semantics. Or maybe they have
an accept state and a reject state if we want them to
have more sophisticated output, well, their natural data is a number. So good. We can interpret the output as the value of some counter
when we're definitely. And the textbook calls these
additive calendar machines. But when I've seen them
in the literature, I've just seen them
called contributions. So let's go through some examples of counter machines to
see what they can do. So pause right here and
see if you can figure out what exactly is this
counter machine doing? Well, if we, what it's doing. It takes an input a that goes
into the counter called a, and it decrements a and
increments be twice, and then jumps back to this test. So however big a is that's how many times this loop right
here is going to execute. Each time it executes, B goes up twice, so B ends up with twice the value a. So if we consider be
like an output counter, this computes the function
f of a equals two times. Now, this little loop construct we
did here is going to be useful. I don't always want to
write it in this way. So if ever I write while a
bigger than 0, do something. That's going to be a shorthand
for what USC up here. If a equals 0, go to I, the first line after the loop, otherwise do the instructions. And then the last line is
an unconditional goto. Okay, so we're going to
freely use this while loop. Knowing is just a shorthand
for what we did here. So here's another kind of machine. Pause right now and see if
you can figure out what the system looks very
similar to this one, except this one has two decrements of a and
only one decremented be. So hey, goes down by two every time and be only goes
up by one every time. So this is computing the
floor of a over two. And I'm writing floor
with these brackets here. Okay. How about this one? Stare at this for a little bit, see if you can figure
out what's going on. So what do we do? We tested phase 0 and
we'll jump if it is here, we test an 800 little jumps. So let's suppose a is big,
it's not going to be 0. What do we do? We, we
decrement, we decrement, and again we jump back
a page or decrement, decrement, jump back up here, decrement, decrement
jump back up here. So at some point a will
get to 0 and will leap out of this loop. And what do we do? Well, we go to reject
or accept based on whether we've just decremented a the first time or the second time. So the parity of a
determines which one. In other words, computing
the predicate a is odd. If n is odd, we jump to line six. Otherwise we get a Lanza. All right, we can imagine getting
two inputs into registers and B. Pause and try to figure out
what this thing is doing. So we look at this while I is 0, we decrement a and none of
this down here touches a. So the outer loop
will execute a times. What does each outer loop do? Well, this loop executes the number of time that executes be many times whatever B starts at, because we, we decrement B, was it increments both C and D. And then now that C got
big, what do we do with C? C, C and D both started at 0, but now C has, you know, whatever value is in B. And now what do we do? Well, this loop executes, see many times and increments be. So. In other words, both
C and D go up here. And then D doesn't get touched here, and C goes back to 0 and b goes
back to what it was, right? So this like executing
this loop be many times. And it got rid of the
value of B at set B to 0, but we saved, didn't see. And then now we can
sort of push it from C back to be with this loop. But we've irreversibly incremented D. And we did it by the amount b. How many times are
we going to do that? We're going to do a many times. So in other words, we're
storing in the register D, the value a times big. Last example, very similar
to the previous one. Only. Instead of this loop
increment in C and D, This one just increments see twice. So there's no D. So stare at those trying to
figure out what it's doing. Well, it's going to
be similar to this. It's at the amount of B, right? And notice that b is
not an input anymore, but we start BY at one, it starts at 0, we increment
it once, it's now one. So what's going to happen? Well, we're going to push B
into C and then push it back. Except we're actually
pushing two copies of B. If every time we
decrement B, C goes up. So in February, b is one, c goes up to two, and then we push C back
into B and B is now two. And then we do this. Well now we push each b and c twice. So C goes up before we
push that back to be four, becomes eight, that goes back here. So when we're done, the register B is going to
be the value two to the a. Okay, So I've presented these like like an assembly
kind of language program. And I actually, I've never
seen that presented that way. I made up that definition
with line numbers because I, this is related a lot of
computing with chemistry, which is part of my research. And I give a lot of presentations to scientists who are
not computer scientists. So they program, most of them
know Python or something, but they don't really know
what a finite state machine. Now, for our purposes, for some of the homework
you're going to do, it's going to be a lot easier
to think about a formalism where these look kind
of more like how you might define target machine. So let's give an
equivalent definition and this is probably the one to
use when you're doing prints. So we say a k counter machine is a triple consisting of
a finite set of states, an initial state, and
a transition function. And similarly to Turing machines, the transition function tells you
on any state that's not call T. And let's suppose we have an
accept and reject state with these special names on it and that you hold if you
enter either those dates. So delta tells you that
a non halting state, this is set difference there. If now what can you do? You can read it whether
each counter is 0 and use that to decide
what to do, right? So in the line number definition, I was saying, Oh, I can test if a
counter 0, do it jump? Well, if you wanted to base it
on what several counters are, you could kind of test
them iteratively. This formalism just lets you
do the test all at once. So what can you read? Will all you can read is the
counter is 0 or it's not 0, right? So you just get a bit, but
you get one for each counter. So there's k bits here, 0 or non-zero based
on that in the state, you go to a new state and
then you modify the counters. And the way you are allowed
to modify the counters is to increment and decrement,
leave them alone. And we'll just assume if you try to decrement the counter
at 0, it just stays 0. So in other words, delta of q, z and z equals R 1 negative 1 0 means if the counter machine is in state
q encounters 13 are both 0, but Counter 2 is positive. Then what we want to do is
go to state our increment, the first counter, decrement the second counter,
leave the third counter. Luck.