Now one of the things
that was known once the partial recursive functions are defined and then the significance, I think maybe wasn't
as appreciate it until later when terrain came along and prove something
similar about his model. But one thing that was
known as that there's a so-called universal partial
recursive function, right? Like that function we saw on the
previous slide of a function that takes as input a description
of an algorithm or if you like, a description of a function, and then an input to
that function and evaluate that function on that input. In modern language, we say there's a flute interpreter that
is written in slope. But in this older kind
of terminology, it's, there's a partial
recursive functions that given any description f bar. So f is the function f bars the description that's
kind of unquote trade of a partial recursive function f and an input x2 f u of f
bar x equals f of x. Now notice that this is
defined if and only if f of x is defined and if they're
defined than they're equal. So the best way to
understand why this is true is just to think about modern
programming languages like Python, where the almost trivial. It's just making the observation that you can write Python
interpreter in Python, right? A universal function in modern
terminology is just an interpreter. But now the best way to
understand how much of that deep, unobvious insight this
was in the 1930s, right before we had the benefit
of our modern understanding of programming languages is to read this mathematical function
way of phrasing it. So we're not going to really prove
it using the old terminology, but I do want to just
write down like just how difficult that would appear to kind of prove something like this. So here's how you would build a universal partial recursive
function using pre 1936 technology. And it's something
called Godel numbering. And it's named after God, who? I think they have proven this, but the original use of
Godel numbering was, that's how he proved Godel's
Incompleteness Theorem. But it's this fancy trick we used with the counter
machines as well, where we use sort of prime factorization representations
of integers so that the key step that
you need here is to come up with a way of representing a partial recursive function in the format that partial recursive
functions expect as input, okay? And the way we've
defined them, they just expect integers as input, right? Patent, right, non-negative integers. So any functions are
like a different type of object and this relation between vectors of integers
and output integer. So how are we going
to represent that as a positive integer so that we're representing an exactly the
partial recursive functions. So, so h will be the function itself, right, is just this abstract
mathematical relationship. H bar is going to be the
integer that represents it. And because it's an
integer, we can give it as input to a reverse function. So the easy one is the base cases. We can say, well, there's three base cases, actually, there's an
infinite number there. There's two. Easy base cases, the constant
0, the successor function, and then this infinite family
of projection functions, one for each non-negative integer and one for each positive integer. And we'll just assign
them these prime numbers. So 7, 11, and 13, 7900 and so on. All the rest of the prime
numbers appear here. Note we skipped three prime numbers. They're going to use down here. So when we compose functions, we need a way of
putting them together, but putting their
descriptions which are integers together into a new integer. So suppose we have f and g
there, partial recursive. Well, they have some
integer representing them, f bar and g bar. Now we need, now there. Composition h is a partial
recursive function. We need to say what is going to be the integer that represents
H. It's going to be this 12 times three to the
representation of f minus 5 to the representation
of G. And again, by the fundamental
theorem of arithmetic, that's a unique representation. If I write that integer
down, you know, which two exponents I had to go here to make it so you can figure
out what f and g are. And we can do something similar
with primitive recursion, which also depends on
having two functions. But we just instead of
multiplying by two at the front, we multiply it by two squared. So again, that gives us a different representation
than any of these. And then finally, 2 cubed times 3 to the F to
represent mu recursion. So recall that, you know, add of x to 0 is just the
projection on to x, right? And then add x. Y is this thing, this primitive recursive function of where the recursion
is on y minus 1, where G here is defined to be
compose the successor with P3. We did this a few slides ago. We're going to kind of pick apart. If I had the add function, how would I figure out what is its representation is just
some positive integer. How would you figure it out? Well, you'll look at what
functions is it made out of? It's made out of these ones. What functions are those made out of? Well, the composition of S with P3, these are two atomic functions, so I can look up here. So g here is represented by two times three to the representation of S times 5 to the
representation of P3, which is this thing, 2 times 3 to the 11 times 5 to the, because S is represented
by 11 p1 by or PI 3 by 19. So that's this number which is six. I don't even know what
that is. Million, billion, trillion, six quintillion. All right, so that's
just the g We need, the help us define add. So ADH is then this thing which
is somewhat modest numbers, but the last one is five
to the sixth quintillion. So anyway, it is possible to represent these functions
uniquely as integers. And you need to reason
about these integers in order to show there's a universal
function that can somehow pick apart a given integer to figure out what functions does it represent and
how do you apply them. So we'll quote from the
textbook here to say that this universal function that
takes a description of f, meaning an integer like this, and an input to it and evaluate
it is itself partial recursive. And the proof of this
claim is rather technical. But we're thankful nod to
the pioneers of computation. We relegate its details to history. As I said, I didn't. I think this is the right way
to understand this theorem. I think this one is right. You can write a Python
interpreter in Python.