So a counter looks like a lot
more useless kind of memory. Then the tape of a
Turing machine, right? I mean, for one, all you can read
about it is it 0 or non-zero? And so most of the ways you can
manipulate it, incrementing, decrementing, they don't change that, you know, that fact about it. If the counters got a
really big number yeah, increment and decrement,
it was positive before. It's positive now. So it kind of seems that there's
not a whole lot you can do. But we did see some examples of some simple arithmetical
functions you didn't do. Well, it turns out you
can push the ideas farther and actually
do any computation. So you can simulate a
single tape Turing machine, and you only need three
counters to do it. So anyway, we were in
lecture right now, this would be where I try
to make you figure it out. Literally pause right now, try to think about how
you might do that. Now, the first step in any
simulation argument is to think, okay, let's worry about how
to do transitions later. First, I've just got to decide if I have a single
tape Turing machine. Its configuration is
identifying the states we can easily represent in our own finite states that
for the counter machine. But the key aspect
of the configuration is what's the contents of the tape, what string is written on
it, and where's the tape? Whereas appointing, how
are we going to represent that in a three counter machine? So here's one way to do it. So you have your a single
tape Turing machine, right? Maybe it's in some state Q6. We can remember that in
our finite states that, but it's got some big binary string. We're going to assume it
has a binary alphabet here, that the tape alphabet is just 0, 1, and then blanks. And we're furthermore,
we're going to assume that they've never puts
a blank in the middle. And through some very
tedious, you know, tricks you can to show
that it's possible to do any computation
you want with a, with a Turing machine that does that. So for now, let's just assume that it'll make this argument simpler. So the, the take content is entirely
represented by a binary string. And it's just assume you have nothing but blanks off the end there. Let's make a further assumption
that the Turing machine is very careful to maintain that the first
and last BED are always one. Right? Again, that might not be
true of a Turing machine, but you could modify
one that just sticks or one on each end and then just treats them like, like
they're at the end. It's so let's assume that's true. So here's how we're going to
represent this with three counters. And in fact, we're going to
represent it with two counters. We only need the third
counter as a sort of a, a work memory to, to modify it. So we will split the, the binary string into two pieces
based on where the tape head is. And we will interpret each side
of that as a binary number. So the binary string
here is 0100, 0, 1, 1, 1 in base two, that represents the integer 39. And the other end, we're going
to do this and assume that the least significant bit is the
one closest to the tape head. So the other one we picture reversing the string and then asked what
number is that in binary? And that's 24. And this example. And first convince yourself any possible configuration of the Turing machine can be represented
by two counters in this way. Right, just a number encoding. What are the bits on the
left of the tape head? Another number encoding, what
are the bits on the right? So now the goal is to come up with all the various operations a
Turing machine can do and figure out what is the counter
machine you have to do to effect the same change that
the Turing machine would do. All right, so let's
break it up like this. And this is what we need the
third counter for, right? It's to, to be kind of a temporary memory as we make modifications
to it a and B over here. So the first Turing machine operation we're going to do is read
the bit under the tape head. We want to know, is the bit
under the tape head currently? Wonder, is it currently? So again, literally pause and
think about how you would do that. So first translate
it to what question is it asking about the
numbers that are there? Well, under the tape
head that corresponds to the number a and it corresponds
to its least significant bit. So we want to know is the least
significant bit of a 0 or not. In other words, we want to
know is a odd or even, right? And we saw how to do that
with only two counters. That's one of the
examples that he did. So we can use a and the third
counter see to test is a HOD. And with a little more work
than we did over here, we could have done with that. We did in that example. We could restore that value back to it when we're done,
we're done reading it. Okay, so we can test is a odd, so now we can store in
our finite states that, oh, what was that? So we can remember that. But now we might want
to change it, right? The transition to the Turing
machine might say, oh, if it's a 0, write a one,
or if it's a one, right? A 0. So pause and think
about what that is. Literally pause. Hit
the pause button. So again, what change does that have on the number being
represented by these bits? Well, if you flip one to a 0, that's just decrementing the number. If you flip a 0 to one That's incrementing because it's
the least significant bit. So that's, that's very simple to do. We actually have that
as a direct command for a counter machine
increment or decrement. Okay, The, we might want to move
the tape head right or left. So we literally pause and think about how would you
move the tape head, right? How would you affect a and
how would you effect be? And what would happen if
the tape had lived, right? Well, that would mean a
would change from being this bit string to that bit
string with a 0 on the end. But what happens to
a binary number when you append a 0 to the end of it, multiplies it by two. Now what's happening to be, be used to have all
these bits, right? Zeros are 0, 1, 1, or in reverse order. And the order we read it for
representing a number 1 ones are 0. But now we've gotten rid of the last year or so
we've chopped officer. Well, what does that
mean you're doing or if it's a one we're
chopping off the one. What does that correspond to doing? Well, it means we're
cutting it in half, so a is going to get doubled
or doubled and add one. If, if we move the
tape head over a 1, and then B is going
to get cut in half. And if it was odd, then that's
integer floored division. Now moving the tape had left
is exactly symmetric to that. So that corresponds to doubling
be and maybe adding one and cutting in half with
an integer floor division. And then finally, the last
thing we have to worry about doing is, well, what if the Turing machine
needs to grow its tape, right, until we can
sometimes picture, oh, it's got an infinite
number of blanks, but what if we just
represented as binary strings? So what does it moves
on to the blank and then there's not just
one blank over here. And let's remember we always want
us in the endpoints are wanting. So how would we move over here
and then change that to a one? Like what effect does that have? So literally pause and think
about what that means. Okay, So if indeed the, the tape head is all
the way here, well, it means a is taking
them all the bits and B doesn't have
anything in it, right? So B is essentially 0 now. So what we're doing is that if you try to move
the tape head right, but b is 0 and that's a test we
can do with our counter machine. Then B is going to stay 0. The tape has not going to be here. We're still going to
allocate no bits to B, but a is going to have
an extra one, right? It's gonna, we're
gonna put a one there so we double a and add one. Just like anytime you move
the tape head, right.