Now the primitive
recursive functions, we're conjectured to maybe
be able to capture all of the functions that we would sort of intuitively regard as computable. And Ackermann essentially showed
that no, that's not the case. And so there's this
function we're going to study now called the
acridine function. It's sort of distinctive
characteristic is that it's quote,
obviously computable. But it is not primitive recursive. So here, there's a bunch of variants
of the Akram and functions. I'm just going to give
one that's kind of like easy to, to look at. And so we're going to start
by talking about a family of functions so that they're not just
going to be one function here. So we're going to think
of this function a1, an XY takes two inputs
and it adds them. But we can think of this as saying, start with X and do the successor function
and do it y times, right? So we're iterating the successor
function on the first input. And the second input tells us
how many times the iterated. And then addition or
multiplication is a2 of x, y, x times y. And what does that do? It says, well, start with X and then do the first level
here, A1, the addition. Do that to two x and do
it y times in a row. So that's what multiplication is. It's iterated addition. Just like addition is
iterated successor. Exponentiation is
iterated multiplication. And this is the third sort of so-called level of the
aggregate function. You can carry this idea further. You can imagine saying, well, let's take exponentiation,
iterate it. So in other words,
compute x to the x, to the x to the x, et cetera. And do that. Why times in a row? This is the last one I know that has a name, it's called titration. And so as you can imagine,
this grows very rapidly. As y grows, even if x
is like, Oh me too. And you can imagine A5
says iterate titration. However many times is given
by the second argument. So this can be formally defined in this way and
this recursive way. So you say Ai of x, y is just 1 if y is 0. And then otherwise you recursively
look at AI of x, y minus one. And then take that as the second argument in
this call to Ai minus one. So Knuth's up arrow notation is something that sort of
captures each of these levels. So he would write a single Up arrow to me and exponentiation and
then that's the third level. Two up arrows would be titrations of x to the x, to the x to the x. And that tower is y axis i. And then x triple up arrow
would be the fifth one, and that would be x double up
arrow x double up arrow x, w, et cetera, et cetera. Okay, So these functions grow very fast after you get
past the first two, the right bus, each level of them is. Sort of primitive recursive. So if I want to compute AI, I can do it with this series of nested for loops are
nested repeat loops. I'm not going to dig into the
details of this, but essentially, it's similar to how we
showed that addition and multiplication exponentiation
are implementable by these blue program. So you just keep adding new
loops on the outside of that. Each loop you add gives you a new sort of level of
the acronym function. Okay? So, so each of these is
primitive recursive. But notice I is kinda hard-coded
into this whole thing. If you wanna compute Ai
plus one, this can't do it. You have to put this inside of a div. So what if that AI is
an input variable also? So this is when people talk
about Ackermann function, they mean this one or there's
some other variants of it, but this is one single function
that has I and x and y as inputs. And then it's
expressible in this way. And this doesn't match the format of primitive recursion we talked
about like this one does. This is how you express
it, a primitive recursion. But this one does because
his eyes and input here. Okay, so the way that
I prefer to think of primitive recursive in terms of these bloop programs
of the bounded loops. So any blue program is going to have a fixed number of nested loops. So it seems difficult to compute this a with a single bloop programs. It seems like we need high
nested loops to get the ith row. But this can get up to an arbitrary number of sort of
rows of the Ackermann function. So here's another characterization of the primitive recursive functions. So we can say a
function f is primitive recursive if and only
if there's a program. So by this, I mean, you know,
Turing machine or Python program. And an I such that p on
input x computes f of x. And the time it needs is bounded by the ith Ackermann function here it's bounded by
a of two comma head. So in other words, if there's a Turing machine that
can compute f and two n steps, or two to the n steps for 2
to the, 2 to the 2 to the, so on and many timesteps, as long as that tie could
be a huge time-bound. But as long as one
of those, you know, a sub i functions bounds it than we, than the functions
primitive recursive. And that's an exact characterization. So now we're going to argue that the thing we call the
Ackermann function, where it's not this family, but actually that, that subscript
is just one of the inputs. Here's how we're going to argue that this is not primitive recursive. And it's that we can define this. This is sort of like a one input
version of the Ackermann function on input and you compute
a sub n of 2 comment. Well, the point is
that grows faster than any single level because the
subscript there is getting bigger. So this first Ackerman, like what, what's going on there? Well, f of one is just three. It's two plus one. So it's three. But then f of two, right? What's happening? Well, the two gets
added to itself. Twice. There's two twos in there. F of three is what we're now, we're, now we've moved
up to the third level. So we're doing multiplication, and we're doing that on three
copies of 2 and f of 4. We're doing the titration, this tower of 2's. So that's a tower of height four. Does. And so as you can see, the number
of iterations is getting bigger, but so is the operation, right? So f of five is a 5 of 25, which is this thing. And what does that? Let's try to pick that apart. The five 2's here, but this very rapid
titration functions being evaluated on each of them. Well, that's this thing right here. This two to double up
arrow two is just four, so we can replace that with two. I'm going to double up arrow for, is this two to the two
to the two to the du, which is about 65 thousand. And then, okay, well I'll try to write this in notation to
double up arrow this thing. Well that's to double up arrow of about 65 thousand but
then that Do you know? I don't even know of a
way to represent that. So we can actually see this is yet another example of this
technique of diagonalization. So this is one reason that, that Ackermann was
thinking this way is that this is why I call these
rows of the Ackermann function. So if this whole table kind of
defines that Ackermann function, then essentially the diagonal
is this thing on input and we look at the nth row and we compute it on the value 2 comma m, right? So the first thing here
too is just fixed, but the second input is
which column we're in. And this row is, is also the first, and that's what
we're looking at, the diagonal. And the diagonal is
drawing very rare. So in particular, the diagonal
is growing faster than any single row because each one of these grows much faster
than the one before it. So this thing could not be bounded by any single row of this table. So that's an argument
that it's not primitive recursive because of
that characterization that a function's primitive
recursive if it can be computed by a time-bound that's
of the form one of these rows. But here you're going to
write down the output. You need so much time that it
would exceed any of these rows. But now the Ackermann function
is computable, right? This is what Ackerman invented
it for is to show, Look, there's something that's
intuitively computable, but it did not primitive. So here's a recursive
implementation of it, like regular recursion that can actually be turned
iterative if you want, you want an iterative implementation. We don't make any recursive calls. You can do it with a stack. The stack is your only sort
of unbounded memory here. But you know, you're, you're
pushing quite a few things onto it. And it turns out that the
stack can actually be represented with just a
single integer, right? And then pop, pop, push and is empty. It can be implemented as primitive
recursive functions of us. So let's just stare at this thing. So this is not a bloop program. It has this wild loop
that has this loop where whether we're going to exit the loop depends on
what happens in here. We do, we sort of pop more things than we push and
end up with an empty stack. So if we knew in advance how many iterations the while
loop was going to execute, then we can replace that loop with a bounded loop and show a
is primitive recursive. But we can't do that. The number of times
going to execute is essentially the output itself. So this is a more general
kind of programming language that the textbook calls
flute for free loops. And these are essentially
just a pseudo-code, right? So this is just as fully
general as like Python. And therefore Turing Universal.