So as I said, all these varying
models of computation were intended to
answer this question, what is a computable function which needed to be answered before
anybody could hope to, to sort of tackle Hilbert's question about is there a computable
function that on input, a mathematical theorem tells
you whether it's true or false. But he didn't phrase it that way. Just said find the function, but people started to suspect, well maybe that can't be done, but in order to show
it can't be done, we've got to nail down what is, what do we mean by
computable function? So there was a bunch of
these competing models. Girdle and her brand, develop the Mu recursive functions. That was a response to the failure of the primitive recursive
functions that to capture everything that we intuitively think we mean by computable church or done the Lambda definable
functions of lambda calculus. And his student Stephen clean E, showed that in fact, mu recursion and lambda
calculus are equivalent. They can eat, simulate each other. And that the developers had
shown that wide classes of known computable functions work word definable and these models. And yet most still work convinced that this is
the right definition. So just like with the
primitive recursive functions, you can get most of the functions you tend to think about with those. But that's not very strong evidence that there's not something else
that you might be able to compute. If only your language can't compute, you just haven't thought of the
function that just like with the Ackermann function
and primitive recursive. So church sort of believe right away that lambda calculus just obviously captured all the
computable functions. And he showed a version of the
halting problem being undecidable. He showed that the problem finding whether a lambda expression quote, as a normal form and this is somehow the equivalent of
halting computation. That that question is not itself
solvable by lambda calculus. So in other words, the lambda calculus
halting problem is undecidable by lambda
calculus programs. And he thought that that meant, oh, well that shows Hilbert's question, can't be answered because we are, the halting problem is undecidable. But what if church was
wrong and asserting that everything computable is
computable by lambda calculus, it wouldn't rule out that
something lambda calculus can't do could be the positive
answer to Hilbert's question. And he got pretty contentious. And Neil Post was another
pioneer in this area. You know, in writing
in a journal paper, use Church of masking
this identification of the solvability of Hilbert's
question under a definition. Cleaning similarly found audiences not giving him unquote Chile
receptions about lambda calculus. And so after General Recursive ness appeared and he proved
them equivalent, you started explaining things in that format because people are just, they didn't get why they, why lambda calculus should, should be a candidate here. Now the existence of
universal programs, a universal recursive functions
and lambda expressions was known in a sense
there's something called the cleaning normal form. Give some notion there, but they
were difficult to construct, difficult to see why they
word and the significance of it wasn't fully appreciated yet. And this is all happening in the United States
and over in Britain. A first year graduate student at the University of Cambridge named Alan terrain heard
about this problem in a, in a course on logic and
started thinking about it. And wasn't talking any of these
people just kinda thought on his, The Fountainhead much different
thoughts about this problem. And that resulted in him giving the first convincing argument for the correct definition of
mechanical computability. And I really liked this quote
from the textbook that they pulled out of this other
book about terrain. He said, what does a
Turing machine look like? Google for a description of it, you get some crazy-looking
machine like this. But he says a better approach
is to look in a mirror. Right? So what does that mean? So what the computer? I mean, what is it? There's
different kinds. We all agree. This is one, this is one. I've seen these once in
your life somewhere. These main principle
with, but what is it? What makes a computer
a computer, right? They didn't always look like this. One time. They look like this. Right before we had this ability
to build electronic computers. And while we still didn't have the machine technology necessary to make Babbage's
mechanical computers. Computers were people,
there was a profession. A person would sit with some
fairly precise instructions about what computation's
I had to be done. They'd have pen and paper
and maybe some help. But they would sit and follow the
instructions and do computation. And it was thinking about this
kind of computer person just sitting down with a pen and a paper that lead terrain to his definition. And I can actually hardly
do better than just a quote straight out of
his original paper. So this is exact text from, from turns first paper on computable numbers with an application to the
inside it's problem, It's quite an understated very solve the problem showed, showed
it can't be solved. Actually. They said computing is
usually done by writing symbols on paper, right? And we can suppose
divided into squares. And the two-dimensional
character is not essential. So that it ends of bones as well. If you want to do the tedious, but you could write it on
one dimensional paper, on it, divided into squares, right? So I'm trying to highlight here where we get this modern definition out of his sort of reasoning
about what is a person, a human computer doing when they
sit down to do a computation? That's what the Turing machine
was intended to capture. It was not intended to capture
what your iPhone does. Well, your laptop, those
those didn't exist yet. It was intended to capture
what could a person do with sufficiently precise
instructions and of paper and enough patients
and time on their hands. Because that's what people thought
of as intuitively computable. So he says, well, the behavior, the computer a MOM is
determined by the symbols written down in the state
of mind, right? Of state. Here, this state really corresponds to what's
going on in your head. And he has, I'm not going
to quote the whole paper, but he has some very convincing
arguments to imagine that for the purposes of
doing computation like this, we only have a finite number
of states that we can access. That you think we have an
infinite number at some point the two of them get too close and you sort of can't reliably
tell the difference between. So he says, Oh, it's
all also imagine that the operations are split up into simple operations that
are so elementary, can't divide them further. And it's such a simple operation that not more than one symbol is altered, editor, or any other changes and
split up into simple operation. So this is why we're talking about reading one symbol and writing ones. And now it's all always
possible for the computer, meaning this person to
break off from his work, go away and forget all about it. Later, come back and go on. But if so, you've gotta
leave a note for yourself. What was I doing when I left? So this note that you leave
to yourself is somehow the state of mind and it doesn't capture everything
going on in your head. But, you know, maybe
you're all distracted. You're thinking about a
fight, you had all of this, but that's not relevant
to doing the computation, whatever you're going
to write down so that you can come back and pick
up where you left off. That's the part of your state
of mind that you need to remember and that's the
parties arguing, fight. So we'll suppose that U, the computer works in
such a desultory manner. I really love the way
the British right here, that he never does more than
one step in a same, right? So you always just sit
down, do one step, and then just write a note yourself, get up and go off
and come back later. So the state of progress
and what you're doing is completely determined by the node of instructions you left
for yourself describing your state of mind and
the symbols on the tape. Or in other words, the computer
updates by calculating a deterministic function of your state and the symbol
you're currently reading.