en-ECS 220 7a_7.6-1 counter machine definition and examples.txt

We're going to jump ahead a
little bit in the textbook to a model that I really like at some homework problems on
it called counter machine. And this is another model of computation that
like a Turing machine, you think of as a
finite state machine with some unbounded memory provided. But it's a much more limited
looking kind of memory. There's just a fixed
number of what we call counters and each holds
a non-negative integer. So if we want to, so that the natural form of input to this sort of model
is natural numbers. So the way that we do that, that is we simply put the inputs we wanted to give
into some of the counters. And we have to assume we have
at least enough counters to hold all those inputs. And then all the other
ones start at 0. And that's kinda like
having a input tape and a work tape and attention. Okay, So this is a
finite state machine, but each state is one of
the following types, right? So each state is a command saying
to do one of these things. Increment a certain counters seek to like ink to name
increment counter number to decrement counter c.
And this has no effect. If C is already 0, it
can't be negative. You have a test for 0, right? So we're going to make
these lines of code. We can say, well, if a
certain counter is 0, then we'll jump to line i or state I. And we can also allow
an unconditional goto. Technically this one isn't needed. This can be a shorthand for having the if statement for some counter that you'd
never use for anything else. Now, what are these used for? Well, you can give it different semantics the same time
you have for Turing machines, they can have accept
or reject semantics. Or maybe they have
an accept state and a reject state if we want them to
have more sophisticated output, well, their natural data is a number. So good. We can interpret the output as the value of some counter
when we're definitely. And the textbook calls these
additive calendar machines. But when I've seen them
in the literature, I've just seen them
called contributions. So let's go through some examples of counter machines to
see what they can do. So pause right here and
see if you can figure out what exactly is this
counter machine doing? Well, if we, what it's doing. It takes an input a that goes
into the counter called a, and it decrements a and
increments be twice, and then jumps back to this test. So however big a is that's how many times this loop right
here is going to execute. Each time it executes, B goes up twice, so B ends up with twice the value a. So if we consider be
like an output counter, this computes the function
f of a equals two times. Now, this little loop construct we
did here is going to be useful. I don't always want to
write it in this way. So if ever I write while a
bigger than 0, do something. That's going to be a shorthand
for what USC up here. If a equals 0, go to I, the first line after the loop, otherwise do the instructions. And then the last line is
an unconditional goto. Okay, so we're going to
freely use this while loop. Knowing is just a shorthand
for what we did here. So here's another kind of machine. Pause right now and see if
you can figure out what the system looks very
similar to this one, except this one has two decrements of a and
only one decremented be. So hey, goes down by two every time and be only goes
up by one every time. So this is computing the
floor of a over two. And I'm writing floor
with these brackets here. Okay. How about this one? Stare at this for a little bit, see if you can figure
out what's going on. So what do we do? We tested phase 0 and
we'll jump if it is here, we test an 800 little jumps. So let's suppose a is big,
it's not going to be 0. What do we do? We, we
decrement, we decrement, and again we jump back
a page or decrement, decrement, jump back up here, decrement, decrement
jump back up here. So at some point a will
get to 0 and will leap out of this loop. And what do we do? Well, we go to reject
or accept based on whether we've just decremented a the first time or the second time. So the parity of a
determines which one. In other words, computing
the predicate a is odd. If n is odd, we jump to line six. Otherwise we get a Lanza. All right, we can imagine getting
two inputs into registers and B. Pause and try to figure out
what this thing is doing. So we look at this while I is 0, we decrement a and none of
this down here touches a. So the outer loop
will execute a times. What does each outer loop do? Well, this loop executes the number of time that executes be many times whatever B starts at, because we, we decrement B, was it increments both C and D. And then now that C got
big, what do we do with C? C, C and D both started at 0, but now C has, you know, whatever value is in B. And now what do we do? Well, this loop executes, see many times and increments be. So. In other words, both
C and D go up here. And then D doesn't get touched here, and C goes back to 0 and b goes
back to what it was, right? So this like executing
this loop be many times. And it got rid of the
value of B at set B to 0, but we saved, didn't see. And then now we can
sort of push it from C back to be with this loop. But we've irreversibly incremented D. And we did it by the amount b. How many times are
we going to do that? We're going to do a many times. So in other words, we're
storing in the register D, the value a times big. Last example, very similar
to the previous one. Only. Instead of this loop
increment in C and D, This one just increments see twice. So there's no D. So stare at those trying to
figure out what it's doing. Well, it's going to
be similar to this. It's at the amount of B, right? And notice that b is
not an input anymore, but we start BY at one, it starts at 0, we increment
it once, it's now one. So what's going to happen? Well, we're going to push B
into C and then push it back. Except we're actually
pushing two copies of B. If every time we
decrement B, C goes up. So in February, b is one, c goes up to two, and then we push C back
into B and B is now two. And then we do this. Well now we push each b and c twice. So C goes up before we
push that back to be four, becomes eight, that goes back here. So when we're done, the register B is going to
be the value two to the a. Okay, So I've presented these like like an assembly
kind of language program. And I actually, I've never
seen that presented that way. I made up that definition
with line numbers because I, this is related a lot of
computing with chemistry, which is part of my research. And I give a lot of presentations to scientists who are
not computer scientists. So they program, most of them
know Python or something, but they don't really know
what a finite state machine. Now, for our purposes, for some of the homework
you're going to do, it's going to be a lot easier
to think about a formalism where these look kind
of more like how you might define target machine. So let's give an
equivalent definition and this is probably the one to
use when you're doing prints. So we say a k counter machine is a triple consisting of
a finite set of states, an initial state, and
a transition function. And similarly to Turing machines, the transition function tells you
on any state that's not call T. And let's suppose we have an
accept and reject state with these special names on it and that you hold if you
enter either those dates. So delta tells you that
a non halting state, this is set difference there. If now what can you do? You can read it whether
each counter is 0 and use that to decide
what to do, right? So in the line number definition, I was saying, Oh, I can test if a
counter 0, do it jump? Well, if you wanted to base it
on what several counters are, you could kind of test
them iteratively. This formalism just lets you
do the test all at once. So what can you read? Will all you can read is the
counter is 0 or it's not 0, right? So you just get a bit, but
you get one for each counter. So there's k bits here, 0 or non-zero based
on that in the state, you go to a new state and
then you modify the counters. And the way you are allowed
to modify the counters is to increment and decrement,
leave them alone. And we'll just assume if you try to decrement the counter
at 0, it just stays 0. So in other words, delta of q, z and z equals R 1 negative 1 0 means if the counter machine is in state
q encounters 13 are both 0, but Counter 2 is positive. Then what we want to do is
go to state our increment, the first counter, decrement the second counter,
leave the third counter. Luck.-e 

en-ECS 220 7a_7.6-2 Turing universality of 3-counter machines.txt

So a counter looks like a lot
more useless kind of memory. Then the tape of a
Turing machine, right? I mean, for one, all you can read
about it is it 0 or non-zero? And so most of the ways you can
manipulate it, incrementing, decrementing, they don't change that, you know, that fact about it. If the counters got a
really big number yeah, increment and decrement,
it was positive before. It's positive now. So it kind of seems that there's
not a whole lot you can do. But we did see some examples of some simple arithmetical
functions you didn't do. Well, it turns out you
can push the ideas farther and actually
do any computation. So you can simulate a
single tape Turing machine, and you only need three
counters to do it. So anyway, we were in
lecture right now, this would be where I try
to make you figure it out. Literally pause right now, try to think about how
you might do that. Now, the first step in any
simulation argument is to think, okay, let's worry about how
to do transitions later. First, I've just got to decide if I have a single
tape Turing machine. Its configuration is
identifying the states we can easily represent in our own finite states that
for the counter machine. But the key aspect
of the configuration is what's the contents of the tape, what string is written on
it, and where's the tape? Whereas appointing, how
are we going to represent that in a three counter machine? So here's one way to do it. So you have your a single
tape Turing machine, right? Maybe it's in some state Q6. We can remember that in
our finite states that, but it's got some big binary string. We're going to assume it
has a binary alphabet here, that the tape alphabet is just 0, 1, and then blanks. And we're furthermore,
we're going to assume that they've never puts
a blank in the middle. And through some very
tedious, you know, tricks you can to show
that it's possible to do any computation
you want with a, with a Turing machine that does that. So for now, let's just assume that it'll make this argument simpler. So the, the take content is entirely
represented by a binary string. And it's just assume you have nothing but blanks off the end there. Let's make a further assumption
that the Turing machine is very careful to maintain that the first
and last BED are always one. Right? Again, that might not be
true of a Turing machine, but you could modify
one that just sticks or one on each end and then just treats them like, like
they're at the end. It's so let's assume that's true. So here's how we're going to
represent this with three counters. And in fact, we're going to
represent it with two counters. We only need the third
counter as a sort of a, a work memory to, to modify it. So we will split the, the binary string into two pieces
based on where the tape head is. And we will interpret each side
of that as a binary number. So the binary string
here is 0100, 0, 1, 1, 1 in base two, that represents the integer 39. And the other end, we're going
to do this and assume that the least significant bit is the
one closest to the tape head. So the other one we picture reversing the string and then asked what
number is that in binary? And that's 24. And this example. And first convince yourself any possible configuration of the Turing machine can be represented
by two counters in this way. Right, just a number encoding. What are the bits on the
left of the tape head? Another number encoding, what
are the bits on the right? So now the goal is to come up with all the various operations a
Turing machine can do and figure out what is the counter
machine you have to do to effect the same change that
the Turing machine would do. All right, so let's
break it up like this. And this is what we need the
third counter for, right? It's to, to be kind of a temporary memory as we make modifications
to it a and B over here. So the first Turing machine operation we're going to do is read
the bit under the tape head. We want to know, is the bit
under the tape head currently? Wonder, is it currently? So again, literally pause and
think about how you would do that. So first translate
it to what question is it asking about the
numbers that are there? Well, under the tape
head that corresponds to the number a and it corresponds
to its least significant bit. So we want to know is the least
significant bit of a 0 or not. In other words, we want to
know is a odd or even, right? And we saw how to do that
with only two counters. That's one of the
examples that he did. So we can use a and the third
counter see to test is a HOD. And with a little more work
than we did over here, we could have done with that. We did in that example. We could restore that value back to it when we're done,
we're done reading it. Okay, so we can test is a odd, so now we can store in
our finite states that, oh, what was that? So we can remember that. But now we might want
to change it, right? The transition to the Turing
machine might say, oh, if it's a 0, write a one,
or if it's a one, right? A 0. So pause and think
about what that is. Literally pause. Hit
the pause button. So again, what change does that have on the number being
represented by these bits? Well, if you flip one to a 0, that's just decrementing the number. If you flip a 0 to one That's incrementing because it's
the least significant bit. So that's, that's very simple to do. We actually have that
as a direct command for a counter machine
increment or decrement. Okay, The, we might want to move
the tape head right or left. So we literally pause and think about how would you
move the tape head, right? How would you affect a and
how would you effect be? And what would happen if
the tape had lived, right? Well, that would mean a
would change from being this bit string to that bit
string with a 0 on the end. But what happens to
a binary number when you append a 0 to the end of it, multiplies it by two. Now what's happening to be, be used to have all
these bits, right? Zeros are 0, 1, 1, or in reverse order. And the order we read it for
representing a number 1 ones are 0. But now we've gotten rid of the last year or so
we've chopped officer. Well, what does that
mean you're doing or if it's a one we're
chopping off the one. What does that correspond to doing? Well, it means we're
cutting it in half, so a is going to get doubled
or doubled and add one. If, if we move the
tape head over a 1, and then B is going
to get cut in half. And if it was odd, then that's
integer floored division. Now moving the tape had left
is exactly symmetric to that. So that corresponds to doubling
be and maybe adding one and cutting in half with
an integer floor division. And then finally, the last
thing we have to worry about doing is, well, what if the Turing machine
needs to grow its tape, right, until we can
sometimes picture, oh, it's got an infinite
number of blanks, but what if we just
represented as binary strings? So what does it moves
on to the blank and then there's not just
one blank over here. And let's remember we always want
us in the endpoints are wanting. So how would we move over here
and then change that to a one? Like what effect does that have? So literally pause and think
about what that means. Okay, So if indeed the, the tape head is all
the way here, well, it means a is taking
them all the bits and B doesn't have
anything in it, right? So B is essentially 0 now. So what we're doing is that if you try to move
the tape head right, but b is 0 and that's a test we
can do with our counter machine. Then B is going to stay 0. The tape has not going to be here. We're still going to
allocate no bits to B, but a is going to have
an extra one, right? It's gonna, we're
gonna put a one there so we double a and add one. Just like anytime you move
the tape head, right.-e 

en-ECS 220 7a_7.6-3 Turing universality of 2-counter machines.txt

Now, the three counters seemed
fairly necessary in that argument, but maybe, I don't know, maybe you could get by with
using only one counter to represent the whole Turing
machine configuration and therefore two counters
to manipulate it. And I don't know of any way to do
that in a straightforward way. But Minsky figured out
this very nice idea how to sort of simulate a Turing machine with
a two counter machine. Well, it actually, essentially
what we do is we can simulate three counter machine
with a two kind of machine. And then we know from
the previous slide, 3 counter machines can
simulate turning sheets. So how do we simulate a three counter machine
with a two counter machine? And the reason I say sort of as well, we're not going to represent
the values directly. If we have say, value
certain integers in the first two counters of
the three counter machine. Those integers aren't precisely what shows up in the
two counter machine. So it's a representational trick. So what you do here is if you're three kind of
machine has integers, ABC and they're all non-negative. Then R2, Katherine King will have one counter
that represents that, and then the other
one's a work counter. All right, so this one counter
or represent all three of these. And it does that by letting
that single counter x be two to the a times three
to the b times 5 with the C. Now, hopefully you
see how we could use this to simulate any number
of characters, right? For example, if we had
a five counter machine, what would be the other
numbers we'd have here to represent the two
other counters, right? So counters, let's say D and E. So pause and think about pad, right? So we would do, this would be this times seven to the d times 11 to D. So what we're using here is that every integer has a
unique prime factorization. So if I write down a single
number here and that number, What happens to be to have divisors
that are only 2, 3, and 5. Well then there's a unique value that each of the
exponent's could add. And so that's the sense in which that single number can
represent these three numbers. And it's going to be
convenient one for doing the operations we need to do. So, for example, we might
want to increment B. So pause, like hit the pause button, think about to increment B. How would you change the value x? What we want to change
this b to b plus 1. What does that do to
the whole number? Well, changing this B2B plus
1 takes the whole number, multiplies it by three, right? And multiplying by a
constant like three is something we know how
to do with just two. Just take x and you decrement it. For each time we decremented
you increment the counter three times and you do it till x gets to
0 and then push the value back. So you, you've tripled x. If we want to decrement
the counter, right? Then we divide by a constant, say to decrement a, we divide by two. To decrement C, we
would divide by five. And we can do that with similar
tricks to dividing by two. To test if c is positive.
What does that mean? Well, C is either positive or 0. If it's 0, then five
is not a divisor of x. If it's positive in
any positive number, then five is the divisor of x. So we want to test is x a multiple of five is
congruent to 0 mod 5. And again, we saw how to
test if x is even or odd. That idea extends pretty
straightforward laid a testing whether it's a multiple
of other numbers besides two. So if we want to start with our three counter machine
has its first counter, a is n and b, C are both 0. We would start with x
equals 2 to the n. So, so this is the sense in
which it's indirect. We're not starting with this thing having the input we
really want to give it. And we start with an encoding of n, where n is an exponent in this
exponentially bigger number. So because three counter machines can do turning universal computation, we can compute any function we want, including two to the n, right? So, but what that means is that if x, if f is any computable function, we can start with x equal to two to the input we want
to give to F called M and halt with x equal to 2 to
the f of n. But you might wonder, well, okay, but can we do a
more direct one if we have a computable function F, Can we just start with its input in the counter x and end with its
output in the camera tracks. And that was proven not to be true. So this sort of indirect encoding
is actually necessary here. So in fact, there is no two counter machine that can even compute this
encoding function, right? So there is no two kind of
machine that starts with n In its first counter and ends with two to the n
and its first camera. And in fact, the person who prove
this seemed almost upset about Minsky's result and
said, You know, when, when it was quoting the theorems of this kind of insulting thing about a counter machine can be
simulated by a two kind of machine provided an obscure
recoding is accepted. So they seem to be very
bothered that Minsky was claiming these things are Turing
universal because he thought, Well, wait now, to use them, you have to do this encoding. And this encoding is itself something that they're
not even able to do. So to him, it sort of
seemed like a lot of the work to set it up was
being done by the person, the program or less
to use the machine. But that said, tuna machines Canada universal
computation on encoded inputs, even though they cannot compute
the encoding themselves. But the fact that to
kind of machines can simulate arbitrary three
machines in this way implies that the halting problem for two counter machines
is undecidable. Sometimes people take that as like one possible definition of
what does it mean to say your, your model of computation
is really universal. It's really powerful. Sometimes they say, Well, if it has an undecidable
halting problem, that's an indication that it,
that it's pretty powerful. So one of the homework says
sometimes assigned is to show that one counter machines have a
decidable holding Brahma. So they're just unequivocally weaker. Okay, and then I want to end with this kinda nice idea
from the textbook. This is not as much about
terrain universality, but this will be useful for
homework I like to assign. So one way to think about a two
counter machine is that it's a finite automaton on the
play and not the whole plane, just the first quadrant. And not the real valued plane, the integer valued plane. So it's occupies a point x, y, both natural numbers. And one way to think about it is that I can't write
anything or see anything. It's a robot that can
just move around in here. But one thing you can do, the
consents if it's touching the wall on the bottom or the
wall on the left or both. Right? That's a corresponds
to reading is my counter, what first counter 0 or
is my second noun or 0? And it can move north,
south, east, west. That corresponds to
incrementing and decrementing encounters based on
its current state. And these two bits
telling it about the law. So this seems like a very
weak kind of robot. Randomly. You can't do anything except just tell them I up against a wall or not. But there's an automaton to the
following problem is undecidable. Given x, y, if you start the
atomaton at that position, all right, say if you started here, Will it ever visit the origin? I mean, it's like what it's
doing when it's not touching the wall just looks so
stupidly repetitive. And it seems like you
could easily decide this, but it's actually
undecidable to tell if you know the transition rules
that this thing has, is that ever going
to visit the origin?-e 

en-ECS 220 7b_7.3-1 primitive recursive functions and Bloop.txt

We jumped a bit ahead
in the book with the counter machine because
I really like that model. I wanted to get some homework on it. And now we'll go back
to going in order. So back to this question of how do we define what are all the
possible computations that can be done automatically? How do we do that? So this was a question that needed to be answered before
anybody could hope to. To tackle Hilbert's and guidance
problem asking whether there was an algorithm that could decide the truth in any
mathematical statement, we needed to define
what is an algorithm. What does that mean? Exactly? So here's one attempt that people made the so called
recursive functions. There's going to be a couple
of variants of these, but this was an early
attempt at defining this very slippery notion of what
does it mean for a function to be computable in the sense that a sufficiently well trained
person could sit down with pen and paper and figure
out what is its output given its input from a. So here was a notion that
was introduced really on how to build up functions for many integers
to one integer from scratch. So as we often do, we define some sort
of atomic functions, things that are quote,
obviously computable, very easy to compute. And these three functions
are the constant 0. So on input x, it just ignores x and output 0, the successor function on
input x and outputs x plus 1. And then projection, this is kinda needed in some
technical cases to say, if you're given several inputs, I just want to pick
one of the inputs out. So for example, P1 of any number
is just the identity function. Okay? So those are going to be
our only basic functions. And then now we'll have some, some ways to create new functions given that we've
already defined and computable. So let f and g be functions. So we're going to declare that their composition is
also a function, right? So what? If f can be defined
and G can be defined? And I'm being a little
bit slippery with exactly how many inputs
do they take here is I've said that
there's only one output. You can also define needs
to take several outputs. Or you can equivalently
consider that to be several functions that you
just evaluate independently. So let's just assume the
number of inputs and outputs work out here and its simplest at
this point to think of them all, I mean one input and one output. So then it makes sense
to give an input to, to G and output comes out of that. You give that output to IF and then some other
output comes out of that. And then that is the
composition of f with g. We declared that's computable. We allow this thing called
primitive recursion. And it works like this. You assume that you
have functions f and g. Again as in their computable. And you can use that to define a
new function recursively work. Essentially f gives you the base case and g gives
you the recursive case. So how does it work? Well, you imagine that H is
recursing on only its last him, but so it can take several inputs, but it's only doing
recursion on its last input. In other words, if
I want to know what is h of all these inputs comma 0, That's the base case
for the last input. I just evaluate f on the other
inputs and I get a base case. And then if I want to know what
is h and x comma y bigger than 0? Well, the idea is G can tell me that what I do is I
recursively evaluate h on the same non y input
x and then y minus one. So that's the recursive part. But then, you know, whatever comes out of that, I need to process it somehow. This is often the case when
you do a recursive algorithm, you, you get your returns of answer, then you process it based on
the information you have. So whatever value comes out to be g takes it along with
all the other inputs, x and y, and then figures out
what should the output of H. So note that the recursive case
is always one smaller on y. So this is guaranteed to reach the base case of HX to 0 eventually. Now a whole lot of
what we know, right? So these are the so-called
primitive recursive functions. And a whole lot of what
we know about these is due to the work of Rosa Peter, who was, I think was a
Hungarian mathematician. But they weren't defined by, or they're defined earlier, but we actually know quite
a bit about them now. So let's suppose that you
wanted to implement this. Here's some pseudocode for how you would implement this
recursive function a, H based on f and g, you would just look like this. Just to make it a
little more concrete. And if you want to do it iteratively,
this is how it would look. So you're going to have to
always translate this into a very straightforward
iterative pseudocode because of how regularly
them recursion works. It just evaluates age on the
first inputs are unchanged. The last one goes down. Okay, so let's look at some examples of primitive recursive functions. Prices. There's all, it's very abstract. So what they were trying
to do is to say, okay, what is the most bare bones
definition we can write down for which we can recover everything else
we know how to compute. So let's take some things
that aren't on this list. But then see can we define
them in terms of what's here? So first of all, do is addition. Addition can be
defined in this way as just using primitive recursion and composition together with
constant 0 and successor, right? So you can define add recursively
what we want to add of x, y intuitively to be
the value of X plus Y. So add of 0 is x. That's a base case. So this is assuming this F function that tells you
that f of x tells you the base, just the identity here. And then over here, what do we do? We say, well, add of x, y should be. What? Well, what you do is
you should figure out recursively what's add
of x, y minus one. That's one smaller. So take the successor of that. So in this case, the
g function that takes the recursive value and
then gives you back a, you know, the value you want
is just successor, right? And so here there's writing
it down in these terms. So add of 0 is just the
projection function. It just outputs its first implicated
in or it doesn't write out, it doesn't, it's not otherwise
based on the second, but Add an x, y is g of
x y and x y minus 1, where G is what? Well, gee, can be defined as first, project onto the third element. So g doesn't actually need x or y. Once you've got Add of XY minus
one, That's all it needs. So takes its three in both XYZ
just throws away the first two are just project onto the third and
then take the successor of that. So, so that shows addition
is primitive recursive. Okay, multiplication, we're
going to express similarly, its base case, multiplying x by 0 now is project under
the second input to 600. And the recursive
case is we evaluate, want to know what's x times y? Well, if we know what's
x times y minus 1, we know that that's what, that's
x smaller than x times y. So what do we have to do to that? To get it up to x times y, we have to add x to it, but we've already defined that. So this is how we can compose
the recursive case with something that's primitive
recursive and get multiplication. Exponentiation is similar. X raised to the 0 is one that can be defined with the constant 0
and the successor function. And then x raised to the y is recursively evaluate
x to the y minus one. And then that's not
quite what we need, but that times x would be x to the y. So we take that recursive case, multiply it by x. That's something we showed
is primitive recursive. So the whole thing is okay. So, so this was an early
attempt at defining stuff, and as you can see, it's a
bit cumbersome to work with. One of the benefits of hindsight is that now that we know
a whole lot about programming, there's actually a much more
simple characterization of these things in terms of progress languages that I
find to be very elegant, right? So the textbook calls this primitive programming
language glute, right? And then bloop program. I mean, there's still
pseudo-code, right? But you can imagine implementing
this as a subset of say, Python. So bloop programs, I like to say they have for-loops
but no while loops. Okay, Now, you, if you have a sufficiently
powerful programming language, I mean for, for loops can
do what while loops can do. So what I mean by FOR loops is using for-loops in the way that
you're supposed to use them. Meaning, rather than having some arbitrary condition you test
to know when to exit the loop, a while loop, you're
essentially counting, right? In other words, FOR loop should
be used like a loop that says, repeat the following y times, right? So in other words, before
entering any loop, we have to precompute how many total iterations
it's going to take, right? So instead of writing
it as a for-loop, I'll write it like
repeat the following y times to make it clear
that as you enter the loop, you have to know how many
times you're going to do it, and then that number doesn't
change while you're doing it. You're just going to do
this exactly y times. So this is a way to define add it
using this kind of loop, right? You start z1 and x, and then y times in a row, you incremented, that's
the successor function, and then you return Z1. Now, you can compose that. You can use that as a subroutine
to define multiplication. So essentially what you do
is to multiply x and y. You started Zip2 at 0 and
then y times in a row. You repeat this with
z1, you know, starting, starting to x each time, but z2 taking on the
value of Z1, you're done. You can define
exponentiation similarly by composing with multiplication. So both of these are sort of equivalent formulations of the primitive recursive functions. Now we're not going to prove that, we're not going to prove that
these two are equivalent. But it is a very nice
way to think about, you know, what is
primitive recursive mean? It means that you can implement
it in a programming language, but where are the only kind
of loops you're allowed to do are ones where as you enter them, you've already computed how many
times they're going to execute. So you can't have anything happening in the body of the loop effect. Whether you're going to
exit after that iteration or it's just fixed once
you start the loop, how many times it's going to execute.-e 

en-ECS 220 7b_7.3-2 Ackermann function.txt

Now the primitive
recursive functions, we're conjectured to maybe
be able to capture all of the functions that we would sort of intuitively regard as computable. And Ackermann essentially showed
that no, that's not the case. And so there's this
function we're going to study now called the
acridine function. It's sort of distinctive
characteristic is that it's quote,
obviously computable. But it is not primitive recursive. So here, there's a bunch of variants
of the Akram and functions. I'm just going to give
one that's kind of like easy to, to look at. And so we're going to start
by talking about a family of functions so that they're not just
going to be one function here. So we're going to think
of this function a1, an XY takes two inputs
and it adds them. But we can think of this as saying, start with X and do the successor function
and do it y times, right? So we're iterating the successor
function on the first input. And the second input tells us
how many times the iterated. And then addition or
multiplication is a2 of x, y, x times y. And what does that do? It says, well, start with X and then do the first level
here, A1, the addition. Do that to two x and do
it y times in a row. So that's what multiplication is. It's iterated addition. Just like addition is
iterated successor. Exponentiation is
iterated multiplication. And this is the third sort of so-called level of the
aggregate function. You can carry this idea further. You can imagine saying, well, let's take exponentiation,
iterate it. So in other words,
compute x to the x, to the x to the x, et cetera. And do that. Why times in a row? This is the last one I know that has a name, it's called titration. And so as you can imagine,
this grows very rapidly. As y grows, even if x
is like, Oh me too. And you can imagine A5
says iterate titration. However many times is given
by the second argument. So this can be formally defined in this way and
this recursive way. So you say Ai of x, y is just 1 if y is 0. And then otherwise you recursively
look at AI of x, y minus one. And then take that as the second argument in
this call to Ai minus one. So Knuth's up arrow notation is something that sort of
captures each of these levels. So he would write a single Up arrow to me and exponentiation and
then that's the third level. Two up arrows would be titrations of x to the x, to the x to the x. And that tower is y axis i. And then x triple up arrow
would be the fifth one, and that would be x double up
arrow x double up arrow x, w, et cetera, et cetera. Okay, So these functions grow very fast after you get
past the first two, the right bus, each level of them is. Sort of primitive recursive. So if I want to compute AI, I can do it with this series of nested for loops are
nested repeat loops. I'm not going to dig into the
details of this, but essentially, it's similar to how we
showed that addition and multiplication exponentiation
are implementable by these blue program. So you just keep adding new
loops on the outside of that. Each loop you add gives you a new sort of level of
the acronym function. Okay? So, so each of these is
primitive recursive. But notice I is kinda hard-coded
into this whole thing. If you wanna compute Ai
plus one, this can't do it. You have to put this inside of a div. So what if that AI is
an input variable also? So this is when people talk
about Ackermann function, they mean this one or there's
some other variants of it, but this is one single function
that has I and x and y as inputs. And then it's
expressible in this way. And this doesn't match the format of primitive recursion we talked
about like this one does. This is how you express
it, a primitive recursion. But this one does because
his eyes and input here. Okay, so the way that
I prefer to think of primitive recursive in terms of these bloop programs
of the bounded loops. So any blue program is going to have a fixed number of nested loops. So it seems difficult to compute this a with a single bloop programs. It seems like we need high
nested loops to get the ith row. But this can get up to an arbitrary number of sort of
rows of the Ackermann function. So here's another characterization of the primitive recursive functions. So we can say a
function f is primitive recursive if and only
if there's a program. So by this, I mean, you know,
Turing machine or Python program. And an I such that p on
input x computes f of x. And the time it needs is bounded by the ith Ackermann function here it's bounded by
a of two comma head. So in other words, if there's a Turing machine that
can compute f and two n steps, or two to the n steps for 2
to the, 2 to the 2 to the, so on and many timesteps, as long as that tie could
be a huge time-bound. But as long as one
of those, you know, a sub i functions bounds it than we, than the functions
primitive recursive. And that's an exact characterization. So now we're going to argue that the thing we call the
Ackermann function, where it's not this family, but actually that, that subscript
is just one of the inputs. Here's how we're going to argue that this is not primitive recursive. And it's that we can define this. This is sort of like a one input
version of the Ackermann function on input and you compute
a sub n of 2 comment. Well, the point is
that grows faster than any single level because the
subscript there is getting bigger. So this first Ackerman, like what, what's going on there? Well, f of one is just three. It's two plus one. So it's three. But then f of two, right? What's happening? Well, the two gets
added to itself. Twice. There's two twos in there. F of three is what we're now, we're, now we've moved
up to the third level. So we're doing multiplication, and we're doing that on three
copies of 2 and f of 4. We're doing the titration, this tower of 2's. So that's a tower of height four. Does. And so as you can see, the number
of iterations is getting bigger, but so is the operation, right? So f of five is a 5 of 25, which is this thing. And what does that? Let's try to pick that apart. The five 2's here, but this very rapid
titration functions being evaluated on each of them. Well, that's this thing right here. This two to double up
arrow two is just four, so we can replace that with two. I'm going to double up arrow for, is this two to the two
to the two to the du, which is about 65 thousand. And then, okay, well I'll try to write this in notation to
double up arrow this thing. Well that's to double up arrow of about 65 thousand but
then that Do you know? I don't even know of a
way to represent that. So we can actually see this is yet another example of this
technique of diagonalization. So this is one reason that, that Ackermann was
thinking this way is that this is why I call these
rows of the Ackermann function. So if this whole table kind of
defines that Ackermann function, then essentially the diagonal
is this thing on input and we look at the nth row and we compute it on the value 2 comma m, right? So the first thing here
too is just fixed, but the second input is
which column we're in. And this row is, is also the first, and that's what
we're looking at, the diagonal. And the diagonal is
drawing very rare. So in particular, the diagonal
is growing faster than any single row because each one of these grows much faster
than the one before it. So this thing could not be bounded by any single row of this table. So that's an argument
that it's not primitive recursive because of
that characterization that a function's primitive
recursive if it can be computed by a time-bound that's
of the form one of these rows. But here you're going to
write down the output. You need so much time that it
would exceed any of these rows. But now the Ackermann function
is computable, right? This is what Ackerman invented
it for is to show, Look, there's something that's
intuitively computable, but it did not primitive. So here's a recursive
implementation of it, like regular recursion that can actually be turned
iterative if you want, you want an iterative implementation. We don't make any recursive calls. You can do it with a stack. The stack is your only sort
of unbounded memory here. But you know, you're, you're
pushing quite a few things onto it. And it turns out that the
stack can actually be represented with just a
single integer, right? And then pop, pop, push and is empty. It can be implemented as primitive
recursive functions of us. So let's just stare at this thing. So this is not a bloop program. It has this wild loop
that has this loop where whether we're going to exit the loop depends on
what happens in here. We do, we sort of pop more things than we push and
end up with an empty stack. So if we knew in advance how many iterations the while
loop was going to execute, then we can replace that loop with a bounded loop and show a
is primitive recursive. But we can't do that. The number of times
going to execute is essentially the output itself. So this is a more general
kind of programming language that the textbook calls
flute for free loops. And these are essentially
just a pseudo-code, right? So this is just as fully
general as like Python. And therefore Turing Universal.-e 

en-ECS 220 7b_7.3-3 μ-recursive and partial recursive functions.txt

Ackerman gave this counterexample to the conjecture that the
primitive recursive functions capture all the intuitively
computable functions. Because the Ackermann function
looks intuitively computable, just defined by this
fairly simple recursion t, It's a huge function, but, but it's a fairly
simple definition and it's not primitive
recursive crudely. So one can consider, now I actually don't know a lot about the history of those are
I don't know if this was developed in
response to that or not, but, but in any rate, one can consider adding
a new way to create new functions other than the ways a ladder and
primitive recursion. And it's technically called Mu recursion if it's actually doesn't look a whole very recursive today. But, but the idea is
that you have a function on several inputs and you single
out the last one, call it y. So x is a vector and y
is just one integer. You can define a new function
h called mu sub y of f. And what it's doing is
it's doing a search on the y. And essentially it's defined to be the minimum y that
makes f x y equal to 0. Right? So new recursive functions are then defined exactly the
same way as primitive recursion, allowing all these atomic
sort of functions, composition primitive or recursion. And then this new way to define a new function
called Mu recursion. Basically saying, oh, you're always allowed to define a new function. That is defined to be
the minimum value that, that to assign to the last input
to make the whole function is 0. So this somehow
corresponds to if you're going to implement this in
a programming language, if you have f somewhere that
takes all these inputs, h takes one fewer inputs. So it takes all the x's but
not the why it starts y at 0. Then while F.dr. Evaluates to
something other than 0 increments Y, and once it finds a
way that does this, it returns that one, right? So you can implement
this fairly easily. So this seems intuitively
to be something that should be allowed as a
way to build new functions. But no, such a y may
not exist, right? Primitive recursion is defined
so that the recursion sort of always terminates every primitive recursive function you write down. If you can write it down, it is, it has some well-defined
value on all possible inputs. But you can now write down functions defined with this mu recursion,
this minimum searcher. And there may be no value of
y that makes f evaluate to 0. So this, and if so does
this, why does it exist? That function is
undefined on the input x. And so mu recursive
functions may not be total, meaning they may not be
defined on all inputs. So mu recursive
functions can be total, but they don't have to be in when they're not there called partial. Partial function is one that's
not defined on all inputs. So sometimes these are also called the partial recursive functions, given that they, you know, they allowed the
functions to be partial. And mathematically a function that's
undefined on a certain input. If you want to think
about it algorithmically, this is going to correspond to a
program computing that function. But if you give it an input that is not defined on
the program won't hold. So, right, so, so
every Turing machine, every algorithm you can write down, computes some partial function just defined to be the one that's
only defined when halts, when it halts that, it's defined
to be whatever it outputs. So we have the various
classes of, you know, mathematically defined
functions on the left and then classes of algorithms that
can compute them on the right. The primitive recursive
functions are exactly the ones computable by
bounded loop programs. So these are total, and these programs are guaranteed
to halt and give an answer. And then way down here there's
the partial recursive functions and these correspond to what we now know to be intuitively what
is computable by any algorithm. So any free loop program or in more modern parlance,
any Python program. Now, there is this class
in the middle, right? And it turns out it is, It's nontrivially in the middle, which is those recursive functions, meaning those computable functions that are told they're
defined on every input. So in algorithmic terminology, there are computed by
programs that always hold. And you might think,
well, maybe those exact, maybe the set of functions
they can compute is exactly the primitive
recursive functions, right? But we're going to show
no, that's not true. The, the, the bounded
loop programs here, they're always
guaranteed to terminate, but they're not strong enough to hit every more general algorithm
that's guaranteed to terminate. So we'll show that here. And the in modern terminology we would say no total
programming language, meaning no programming
language that has the property that all of its
programs are guaranteed to halt can compute all the total
recursive functions mean all the functions that
are computable by some program that just
happens to always hold. Even though it's written in a
language where the language doesn't guarantee that
all the broker, right? So there's kind of a
crucial difference there. You can write a program in
Python that always holds. Python itself is not foreseen. All the programs to hold. It is possible to write programs
in Python that don't called. And so in some sense
you're just lucky or clever when you
write one that does. So bloop was a failed attempt to capture all the total
recursive functions, although computable functions
that are defined on every input, the Ackermann function,
the counterexample. It's computable but not by
any bounded loop program. But the question is, is there a more powerful programming language whose programs always Hall
just like bounded loop. But that unlike bloop, can actually compute all the
total recursive function. And we're going to argue
here the answer is no. And suppose all programs in some
language or tone, right there, hold on inputs and this is
enforced by the language just if you can write a syntactically
valid program in that language, it is guaranteed the whole. Suppose that's the way
the language works, which none of the languages you typically use like
Python or C plus, plus behave that way. Okay? So every language, every program you can write
in that language holds. So the universal function, right? For that language defined to be. Now this isn't necessarily
an algorithm and just defining a function takes two inputs, a program and that language
and an input for the program. And it's defined to be whatever
that program does on that. Now, all programs are well-defined on all inputs because they all hope you have some output. So this thing is well-defined. Read every program you can put air, every input you could put here. This has a well-defined value. So using you as a subroutine, we can define a new program V, right? And these gonna do this diagonalization type
of thing we've seen before, where V on input P, a program does the following. It runs piano input p.
It can do that because, you know, you sort of define air. So you can take as input
a program and run it, which is how you works, and then add one to it, right, by running you a PP. But if he did that, V on input B will be
undefined, right? So actually that's in some sense, if we assume that you could be implemented in this
programming language, well then V could be, but V can't be taught to write
V and V is undefined there. So it's not implementable, but it's perfectly easy to implement if you can
implement you that. Did you just do this one
step to use you to run p on its own source code isn't but add
one when you're done and return. So you cannot be implemented either. Right? So, so the punchline here is that the universal function
cannot be implemented. And a similar argument shows that
bloop has no universal program. You can't write a bloop
interpreter and blue. But in fact, this is true of any program programming language where all the programs
or guarantee adult.-e 

en-ECS 220 7b_7.3-4 a universal partial recursive function.txt

Now one of the things
that was known once the partial recursive functions are defined and then the significance, I think maybe wasn't
as appreciate it until later when terrain came along and prove something
similar about his model. But one thing that was
known as that there's a so-called universal partial
recursive function, right? Like that function we saw on the
previous slide of a function that takes as input a description
of an algorithm or if you like, a description of a function, and then an input to
that function and evaluate that function on that input. In modern language, we say there's a flute interpreter that
is written in slope. But in this older kind
of terminology, it's, there's a partial
recursive functions that given any description f bar. So f is the function f bars the description that's
kind of unquote trade of a partial recursive function f and an input x2 f u of f
bar x equals f of x. Now notice that this is
defined if and only if f of x is defined and if they're
defined than they're equal. So the best way to
understand why this is true is just to think about modern
programming languages like Python, where the almost trivial. It's just making the observation that you can write Python
interpreter in Python, right? A universal function in modern
terminology is just an interpreter. But now the best way to
understand how much of that deep, unobvious insight this
was in the 1930s, right before we had the benefit
of our modern understanding of programming languages is to read this mathematical function
way of phrasing it. So we're not going to really prove
it using the old terminology, but I do want to just
write down like just how difficult that would appear to kind of prove something like this. So here's how you would build a universal partial recursive
function using pre 1936 technology. And it's something
called Godel numbering. And it's named after God, who? I think they have proven this, but the original use of
Godel numbering was, that's how he proved Godel's
Incompleteness Theorem. But it's this fancy trick we used with the counter
machines as well, where we use sort of prime factorization representations
of integers so that the key step that
you need here is to come up with a way of representing a partial recursive function in the format that partial recursive
functions expect as input, okay? And the way we've
defined them, they just expect integers as input, right? Patent, right, non-negative integers. So any functions are
like a different type of object and this relation between vectors of integers
and output integer. So how are we going
to represent that as a positive integer so that we're representing an exactly the
partial recursive functions. So, so h will be the function itself, right, is just this abstract
mathematical relationship. H bar is going to be the
integer that represents it. And because it's an
integer, we can give it as input to a reverse function. So the easy one is the base cases. We can say, well, there's three base cases, actually, there's an
infinite number there. There's two. Easy base cases, the constant
0, the successor function, and then this infinite family
of projection functions, one for each non-negative integer and one for each positive integer. And we'll just assign
them these prime numbers. So 7, 11, and 13, 7900 and so on. All the rest of the prime
numbers appear here. Note we skipped three prime numbers. They're going to use down here. So when we compose functions, we need a way of
putting them together, but putting their
descriptions which are integers together into a new integer. So suppose we have f and g
there, partial recursive. Well, they have some
integer representing them, f bar and g bar. Now we need, now there. Composition h is a partial
recursive function. We need to say what is going to be the integer that represents
H. It's going to be this 12 times three to the
representation of f minus 5 to the representation
of G. And again, by the fundamental
theorem of arithmetic, that's a unique representation. If I write that integer
down, you know, which two exponents I had to go here to make it so you can figure
out what f and g are. And we can do something similar
with primitive recursion, which also depends on
having two functions. But we just instead of
multiplying by two at the front, we multiply it by two squared. So again, that gives us a different representation
than any of these. And then finally, 2 cubed times 3 to the F to
represent mu recursion. So recall that, you know, add of x to 0 is just the
projection on to x, right? And then add x. Y is this thing, this primitive recursive function of where the recursion
is on y minus 1, where G here is defined to be
compose the successor with P3. We did this a few slides ago. We're going to kind of pick apart. If I had the add function, how would I figure out what is its representation is just
some positive integer. How would you figure it out? Well, you'll look at what
functions is it made out of? It's made out of these ones. What functions are those made out of? Well, the composition of S with P3, these are two atomic functions, so I can look up here. So g here is represented by two times three to the representation of S times 5 to the
representation of P3, which is this thing, 2 times 3 to the 11 times 5 to the, because S is represented
by 11 p1 by or PI 3 by 19. So that's this number which is six. I don't even know what
that is. Million, billion, trillion, six quintillion. All right, so that's
just the g We need, the help us define add. So ADH is then this thing which
is somewhat modest numbers, but the last one is five
to the sixth quintillion. So anyway, it is possible to represent these functions
uniquely as integers. And you need to reason
about these integers in order to show there's a universal
function that can somehow pick apart a given integer to figure out what functions does it represent and
how do you apply them. So we'll quote from the
textbook here to say that this universal function that
takes a description of f, meaning an integer like this, and an input to it and evaluate
it is itself partial recursive. And the proof of this
claim is rather technical. But we're thankful nod to
the pioneers of computation. We relegate its details to history. As I said, I didn't. I think this is the right way
to understand this theorem. I think this one is right. You can write a Python
interpreter in Python.-e 

en-ECS 220 7c_7.4 λ-calculus.txt

I'm going to mention
now another model of computation which was developed
around the same time period, also intended to be a way to capture all the the intuitively
computable functions called lambda calculus. And this was proposed
by Alonzo Church. And a little oddly, this one has been much more influential in modern
computer science. Then the partial recursive functions. It's the basis in some sense for
functional programming languages, particularly the quote, really
pure ones like Haskell or ELM. Unlike the partial
recursive functions, which I would say people
immediately stop using or once, you know, sort of Turing
machines came along. And, but we're not actually going
to spend a ton of time on it. It's really interesting. And often a programming languages
course like, like 240, well, sometimes deal with this and it's actually a fairly
interesting way to think about programming for the same reason that you're
writing. Language isn't. Writing programs in languages
like Haskell is interesting. But we're going to skip
it for this course. I'm just going to
point out that it's, it exists and it's actually
very easy to evaluate, right? So I found this interpreter for lambda calculus in a fairly
straightforward notation that, that takes seven lines of scheme, which is another thats
is a list variant, another functional
programming language. So it's worth it to know
that, that this was around, but I just want to mentioned this was another sort of competing model. And that's actually been somewhat influential in modern
computer science.-e 

en-ECS 220 7c_7.5-1 Turing's applied philosophy.txt

So as I said, all these varying
models of computation were intended to
answer this question, what is a computable function which needed to be answered before
anybody could hope to, to sort of tackle Hilbert's question about is there a computable
function that on input, a mathematical theorem tells
you whether it's true or false. But he didn't phrase it that way. Just said find the function, but people started to suspect, well maybe that can't be done, but in order to show
it can't be done, we've got to nail down what is, what do we mean by
computable function? So there was a bunch of
these competing models. Girdle and her brand, develop the Mu recursive functions. That was a response to the failure of the primitive recursive
functions that to capture everything that we intuitively think we mean by computable church or done the Lambda definable
functions of lambda calculus. And his student Stephen clean E, showed that in fact, mu recursion and lambda
calculus are equivalent. They can eat, simulate each other. And that the developers had
shown that wide classes of known computable functions work word definable and these models. And yet most still work convinced that this is
the right definition. So just like with the
primitive recursive functions, you can get most of the functions you tend to think about with those. But that's not very strong evidence that there's not something else
that you might be able to compute. If only your language can't compute, you just haven't thought of the
function that just like with the Ackermann function
and primitive recursive. So church sort of believe right away that lambda calculus just obviously captured all the
computable functions. And he showed a version of the
halting problem being undecidable. He showed that the problem finding whether a lambda expression quote, as a normal form and this is somehow the equivalent of
halting computation. That that question is not itself
solvable by lambda calculus. So in other words, the lambda calculus
halting problem is undecidable by lambda
calculus programs. And he thought that that meant, oh, well that shows Hilbert's question, can't be answered because we are, the halting problem is undecidable. But what if church was
wrong and asserting that everything computable is
computable by lambda calculus, it wouldn't rule out that
something lambda calculus can't do could be the positive
answer to Hilbert's question. And he got pretty contentious. And Neil Post was another
pioneer in this area. You know, in writing
in a journal paper, use Church of masking
this identification of the solvability of Hilbert's
question under a definition. Cleaning similarly found audiences not giving him unquote Chile
receptions about lambda calculus. And so after General Recursive ness appeared and he proved
them equivalent, you started explaining things in that format because people are just, they didn't get why they, why lambda calculus should, should be a candidate here. Now the existence of
universal programs, a universal recursive functions
and lambda expressions was known in a sense
there's something called the cleaning normal form. Give some notion there, but they
were difficult to construct, difficult to see why they
word and the significance of it wasn't fully appreciated yet. And this is all happening in the United States
and over in Britain. A first year graduate student at the University of Cambridge named Alan terrain heard
about this problem in a, in a course on logic and
started thinking about it. And wasn't talking any of these
people just kinda thought on his, The Fountainhead much different
thoughts about this problem. And that resulted in him giving the first convincing argument for the correct definition of
mechanical computability. And I really liked this quote
from the textbook that they pulled out of this other
book about terrain. He said, what does a
Turing machine look like? Google for a description of it, you get some crazy-looking
machine like this. But he says a better approach
is to look in a mirror. Right? So what does that mean? So what the computer? I mean, what is it? There's
different kinds. We all agree. This is one, this is one. I've seen these once in
your life somewhere. These main principle
with, but what is it? What makes a computer
a computer, right? They didn't always look like this. One time. They look like this. Right before we had this ability
to build electronic computers. And while we still didn't have the machine technology necessary to make Babbage's
mechanical computers. Computers were people,
there was a profession. A person would sit with some
fairly precise instructions about what computation's
I had to be done. They'd have pen and paper
and maybe some help. But they would sit and follow the
instructions and do computation. And it was thinking about this
kind of computer person just sitting down with a pen and a paper that lead terrain to his definition. And I can actually hardly
do better than just a quote straight out of
his original paper. So this is exact text from, from turns first paper on computable numbers with an application to the
inside it's problem, It's quite an understated very solve the problem showed, showed
it can't be solved. Actually. They said computing is
usually done by writing symbols on paper, right? And we can suppose
divided into squares. And the two-dimensional
character is not essential. So that it ends of bones as well. If you want to do the tedious, but you could write it on
one dimensional paper, on it, divided into squares, right? So I'm trying to highlight here where we get this modern definition out of his sort of reasoning
about what is a person, a human computer doing when they
sit down to do a computation? That's what the Turing machine
was intended to capture. It was not intended to capture
what your iPhone does. Well, your laptop, those
those didn't exist yet. It was intended to capture
what could a person do with sufficiently precise
instructions and of paper and enough patients
and time on their hands. Because that's what people thought
of as intuitively computable. So he says, well, the behavior, the computer a MOM is
determined by the symbols written down in the state
of mind, right? Of state. Here, this state really corresponds to what's
going on in your head. And he has, I'm not going
to quote the whole paper, but he has some very convincing
arguments to imagine that for the purposes of
doing computation like this, we only have a finite number
of states that we can access. That you think we have an
infinite number at some point the two of them get too close and you sort of can't reliably
tell the difference between. So he says, Oh, it's
all also imagine that the operations are split up into simple operations that
are so elementary, can't divide them further. And it's such a simple operation that not more than one symbol is altered, editor, or any other changes and
split up into simple operation. So this is why we're talking about reading one symbol and writing ones. And now it's all always
possible for the computer, meaning this person to
break off from his work, go away and forget all about it. Later, come back and go on. But if so, you've gotta
leave a note for yourself. What was I doing when I left? So this note that you leave
to yourself is somehow the state of mind and it doesn't capture everything
going on in your head. But, you know, maybe
you're all distracted. You're thinking about a
fight, you had all of this, but that's not relevant
to doing the computation, whatever you're going
to write down so that you can come back and pick
up where you left off. That's the part of your state
of mind that you need to remember and that's the
parties arguing, fight. So we'll suppose that U, the computer works in
such a desultory manner. I really love the way
the British right here, that he never does more than
one step in a same, right? So you always just sit
down, do one step, and then just write a note yourself, get up and go off
and come back later. So the state of progress
and what you're doing is completely determined by the node of instructions you left
for yourself describing your state of mind and
the symbols on the tape. Or in other words, the computer
updates by calculating a deterministic function of your state and the symbol
you're currently reading.-e 

en-ECS 220 7c_7.5-2 existence of universal machines and the Church-Turing thesis.txt

All right, so one
might argue with this, there's a lot of interesting
theorems and entering the paper, but I included in the proof that the halting problem is not decidable. But I'm going to call this the most important theorem in the
theory of computing. And it, namely that there is a
universal Turing machine meeting. There's a Turing machine
that oninput Emax, where m is a description of a
Turing machine acts as a string. We can simulate hem events. And part of what made that, even though kind of a
universal functions were known to the people working on the
partial recursive functions. Part of what was important
about this is that it was very straightforward to prove
this somewhat tedious. You actually write down
all the transitions of a universal machine and yeah, I get, that gets a little tedious. But once you wrap your
head around the concept, it's very straightforward
to see that, that you could write a
machine that would just carry out simulating the transitions
of another machine. Much more easy to see then
with these other models, like the MMU recursive
functions and girdle, after seeing this, identified
this ease of simulation. And therefore the ease
with which you can prove the equivalence of other models or use diagonalization to show limitations on the model
has a kind of miracle. Now, part of what is so
convincing about the model as well is that it's extremely robust to choices in
the definition and terrain made. Some noted this that you can add one-way or
two-way infinite tapes. You could have many
tapes or just one. You can have two-dimensional tapes, multiple heads on a tape. All of these are kinds
of machines that can easily simulate each other. And so it's very
convincing that, okay, we stumbled on a fundamental
model here because it's not like it's not going to shatter if
we make one little change to it. Okay, so we started
off this whole chapter talking about great
unifications in science. So This was the great unification for computation that
happened in 1936, which is that a function is
computable by a Turing machine if and only if it's computable by any of these
other competing models that, that people are talking about. Now the rightmost equivalences
shown by church and cleaning. It was published in April 1936. Terrain submitted his paper. He heard about the problem. He knew nothing about what
anybody was doing over in the US. So he completely independently
submitted his paper, proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society and may 1936. While it was under review, he learned about boot this
work of church and cleaning. And he has sold an added approve of this leftmost equivalence to
the appendix of the paper. So he showed turing machines can simulate these and these can
simulate target machines. And then it was published
in 19 November 1936. And I just kinda want to draw your attention to the difference
between these dates here. Note that the first
transatlantic phone service was established in 1927. And yet somehow they were able
to publish journal paper is approximately eight times faster than we can today with the benefit. So I've never quite understood that. Now the skeptics, the
people who were skeptical of lambda calculus,
girdle, and posts, they were immediately
convinced by Turing's paper, in particular by his
physical arguments that this model captured
general computation. This idea of talking about what
does a person do when they sit down to do a mathematical
computation. They were very convinced that, yes, this captures anything you
could possibly mean by that. And it is straightforward using modern sort of
technology to show that all of these are equivalent
to programmability in flute or your favorite
programming language like Python. The so-called Church-Turing
thesis captures this intuition. And it's the statement that the universal Turing
machine can simulate any physical computing device that
can be finite lead described, where each step accesses and modifies a finite
amount of information. Okay, so I call this a thesis and not a theorem because this is not a
mathematical statement. In the middle here I talk about
physical computing device. What exactly does that mean? It means something you can
build in our physical universe. And because that's not
precisely defined, neither does is it precisely defined. What it means for a step
to access and modify it? Finite and information. So it's not a mathematical statement, it's a physical law, right? Just like any other physical law, the laws of thermodynamics. So it's open to refutation
in principle, right? We can't prove this
statement because we can't formalize what are physical
devices in the universe. But it's, we're fairly
convinced it's true. So by analogy, most attempts to build a perpetual motion
machine which would violate the second law
of thermodynamics. Well, they fail because they're actually increasing
entropy somewhere. That's not being
explicitly model by the, the description of the machine. So similarly, when you
see people attempting to refute the Church-Turing thesis
does happen occasionally. It's usually cracked pots. Once in a while, It's
respected scientists. But most attempts to
do this to describe a so-called super
terrain physical device. And there's this whole field
called hyper computation. This is what people think about and actually have conferences
on this stuff. Well, most of them, what they
do is they kinda fail for an analogous reason to try to
build a perpetual motion machine, which is that they smuggle somewhere in their definition
and infinite description. So for example, a neural net where
you imagine that the weights, rather than being 64 bit floating point numbers,
infinite precision. And you'll see people publishing
papers where they imagined o, if you can only program one of
the weights in a neural net to encode in its binary
expansion, the halting problem. We'll then that neural net could, could do sir, Super tearing things. But, you know, the statement is about physical the meeting
devices we can actually build. We don't have to program
like a resistor to have its resistance encode
the halting problem. We just have to get a finite
amount of information and do it. And so that's what the thesis.-e 

