So we now want to
make two statements, these two lemmas, and
they're fairly simple. They're going to be useful on
the last slide for this proof. But let's state them
in isolation here. Now, suppose P is not NP, then what do we know? Well, we know sac is not in B, no polynomial-time program salsa. So if we let Q be an arbitrary
polynomial time program, we know that sat of
x has to be unequal to q of x on at least one string. This lemma is claiming
something stronger. It's saying there's
infinitely many strings that Q has to get the
wrong answer per se. Why is that? Pause
and think about it. So suppose it weren't true. Well, in that case, the number of strings that
Q gets wrong is finite. And we could fix to make
it solve SAT exactly by just having a fixed lookup table for those finite number
of counterexamples. And then we would turn Q into
a program that does solve. So what would be its running time? Well, it'll be slower than Q
because it's first step would be to look in this big look-up table
to see is my input in there. Although actually now step
one could just be check the length and see is it
bigger than any string label? Which could just be done by
comparing to a constant length. So you could skip that
check for most strains. And the running time
would essentially be still polynomial time plus a constant to look in
that lookup table. So we would have a
polynomial-time program solving SAT that would
contradict P not equal to NP. So in fact, every
polynomial-time program has to get sat really wrong. It's gotta be wrong infinitely often. Not Lemma 2 is a sort
of a related statement. But now about reductions. Although here we only need an exists is actually
true for infinitely many. Why? But all we need is this exists. And it's that if a is polynomial time decision
problem, but then there's some y. So that clique of y is
not equal to a of q of y. Or put another way, q, this polynomial-time program
cannot reduce clique to a. And that is simply
following directly from the fact that if P is not NP, then no problem in PDA
can be NP-complete. But if this were false, that would be the same thing as
showing clique reduces to a, we should show it is NP-Complete. Okay, so let's go back to our
Hindi intermediate problem, which is not totally
well-defined yet because we didn't say what
this function f is, but we know it's increasing, starts at 0, it goes up slowly. And it's parody tells us whether
a should look like SAP for strings of that length or whether the answer should just be false
for strings of that line. Now by careful design of F, we're going to ensure one that f is computable in
time polynomial in. Which will mean a is
actually in NP, right? We can just run a non-deterministic program that solves sat and also computes F to C. Should we report the output
of SAP or just false. It's also going to
ensure that for all i, where i indexes into our
polynomial time clock programs, there's some y that makes Q I get
the answer wrong on a, right. Or in other words, no
polynomial-time program QI solves a, so a is not in T. And we're also going to
ensure that for all I, the program QI fails to reduce
clique to a for some string y. All right? Time program QI reduces clique day. So that means a is not
NP complete either. Now remember here on this slide, n as the input length for a, and then f of n is going
to be approximately equal, is actually off by a factor two here. But it's, it's, it's related to the index I of the program QI
that we want to defeat, right? By showing it it doesn't solve
AN or does it reduce clique day? Okay, So here is how
you compute f, right? And the definition of f will
give all three of these, that will give us 1, that f is computable in
time polynomial in n. And that's actually established
in that kind of a CIDI way. But this, this makes sense. Self, self clocking. I didn't write it all out. This is just pseudocode here. But imagine that it's
also self clock and it's counting the
total number of steps. And what it does is it says, well, first of all, for n equals 0, you just return 0 and then now you, you make this recursive
call to f n minus 1. And notice all the rest of the return statements that
are either just return rack, so just return the same value
f is not increasing this time. Or if you make it to one of
these return statements, you return Rec plus 1. So making it past the if statement here to one of these
is how f goes up. So notice before we look at all this detail in the
loop, what's going on. After a word F is going to be a self clocking program that just
counts the total number of steps going on air and compares
them to the input n. And if the number of
steps ever exceeds N, to do all this stuff, you just return the recursive value. So this implies that F is going to be computable in
polynomial time, right? We just do this recursive
calls and then at most a linear number of additional steps. So that, that clearly gives
a polynomial time algorithm. Okay? Now how do we get
the other two properties? Well, we're doing this
if statement, right? So we say, well, if QI y is not equal to a of y,
right? Will go up. So this would establish
the statement over here. If this is ever true, right? If this is ever true, that'll hit this condition
and then will increase f. And then when we increase f will go from the stage where f is even
to the stage where f is odd. And, and if this ever becomes true, will increase F yet again. Right? And so that will make it
true for all possible i's so the only way
that these conditions, these conditions
essentially look like the part after the for all ij here. So the only way for this
to fail is that you get stuck on some I write
it's not true for all i. As long as fn keeps increasing. And we're going to use
those previous two lemmas, these data to show it can't
actually get stuck at those lines. So as a reminder, there's
the definition of a. We let Q be some
polynomial-time program. Okay? Recall our first lemma
that because P is not NP, any polynomial-time
program has to get sack wrong and
infinitely many strings. So we can't get stuck here forever. Why? Well, if we did, if we reach some high
where now this is never true again, what would happen? Well, QI y would equal a of y. And because this is an
even stage where we're letting a be the same as SAT. This would actually imply
that q i agrees with a, because it agrees with
AN every single string. From that point on. It agrees with sat on all
but finite be many strings. A doesn't look exactly like SAT. It's sometimes falls, but
if we get stuck here, will never again
enter a false region. And so for all the
strings beyond that, a would just be the
exact same as SAT. And it'll only be a finite number of counter-examples where a
and SAT are different. And that would contradict Lemma 1, which says that no
QRS polynomial time, it has to get that
wrong infinitely often. So because P is not NP, eventually we'll find a y where q and sat and therefore
also a are different. All right, and then Lemma two
says that clique cannot reduce, There's IQ cannot reduce clique to a. And this is a formal
statement of what that means. So here again, we're just
checking this condition. Suppose we got stuck here. Then clique of y would
equal a of QI of why. And what would happen? Well, because we're in
an odd stage, right? A x would just be false
from that on, right? So a would be a language that has only finite the many strings in it. Decision problem terminology would have only finite the
many yes instances. But what does that mean? Well, any language with only a
finite number of strings is, I mean it's regular, right? So it's definitely NP. So then a would be NP if
we got stuck here forever. And Lemma 2 says while
because P is not NP, we can't reduce clique to a. So eventually there's
gotta be some y. That makes this inequality hold. And therefore, we can't
get stuck here either.