So we're going to go back
right now to the middle 1800s. And Charles Babbage was checking astronomical tables and finding a whole lot of errors
and calculation. And this is in the midst of the Industrial Revolution
and he reported they said that he wished these calculations
had been executed by steam. Meeting, had been executed
automatically by some machine. That if it was designed
right, wouldn't make errors. And then he thought, okay, maybe I'll try to
build such a machine. And it wasn't originally intended
to be a general purpose machine. It was based on the following
principle that a lot of these functions that you want to evaluate in certain
physical sciences, for example, astronomy, have what's called a
Taylor series expansion. As you may remember
this from calculus, It's essentially the idea that certain well-behaved functions at certain well-behaved points can be expressed as an infinite
sum of polynomials that converge to the
value of the function. So f can be much more
general than a polynomial. But if you look at it and its
derivative and second derivative, third derivative,
derivative and so forth. At this point a, so that's
just an individual number. And then you plug it
into this expression, which is going to end
up being a polynomial because this will
just be some number, this will just be some number,
this will just be some number. And then you multiply it
by this polynomial term, x minus a raised to
some integer power. For well-behaved functions and
well-being points, this converges. And for some of them it
converges pretty rapidly. So cosine of x, for example, which
is not a polynomial, you just take the so-called
fourth order Taylor expansion, which is first few terms, which are just these. And within this interval
0 to Pi to that, this is within 0.02
of the actual cosine. So it can get pretty close. So if you're happy with approximations, Taylor series is a
great way to do it. And what do you have to do
to evaluate a Taylor series truncated to some fixed number of first terms while
it's a polynomial. But how are you going to evaluate
polynomials automatically, they seem to involve doing
some difficult things like multiplying and
exponentiating and so forth. So Babbage wanted to use this thing called the
method of finite differences. So the key observations, if you have a polynomial and
you look at its value on, on two points that
are one apart, right? So we imagined p of
x and p of x plus 1. If we express what that
is as a function of x, call that delta p of x. It's something like that. Like a discrete derivative
with changeable one. That is a degree n
minus one polynomial. So for example, the
difference between x cubed plus 1 and x plus 1 cubed plus 1. This will expand out to have just an x cubed term
that cancels this. And the remaining terms
are all x-squared or less. So you can imagine you have
some polynomial like this, but you look at delta of that polynomial and its
degree one smaller, it's got an x squared delta of that thing is just linear and
delta that is just a constant. So whatever is the degree, you get, this series of polynomials
that are smaller degree 2, you just get down to a constant. And so you imagine if you want to evaluate this polynomial
at various points, I'm just showing integers here, but it could be done with
floating point numbers as well. Well, you have sort of a base case, which is that to evaluate them on 0, you just look at the
constant term, right? So for 0 it's one here. This one has two, this one
is 10, this one is six, and this one there's
only a constant terms and in fact it's six everywhere. So this looks kind of like
dynamic programming, right? You have this sort of base case here. And now the idea is we can
fill in all the rest of these based just on what we've
calculated so far. So if we rewrite this and
substitute x equals 0, we get that if we add P 0, which is this, and delta p, which is this, we get p1. Do we just add those two integers? And then if we add delta p 0 and delta delta P 0
will get delta P1, right? So we add 10 to 12, we add 10 and 6 to get 16. And then to get the next column. Well, it's the same thing with
x equals 1 P1 plus delta P1, P2, and so on and so on. And we can fill in this whole table
just by adding numbers, right? It's significantly simpler
computation to do. And remember that in turn, if we have a large enough degree
polynomial can approximate very closely just about any kind of function that you
encounter in the sciences. So what Babbage did was to build a machine based on this
principle that could, that could do these
additions of evaluating these polynomials in order to
evaluate arbitrary function. So you just had to come up with the Taylor series
expansion of the function, turn it into those polynomials,
decreasing by degrees. And then program the
polynomial by giving the coefficients by turning
these little rotors here. So this is a fairly
detailed description of how this thing works at this address. If you're curious, I
encourage you to watch that. And I think there's one of these actually somewhere in Silicon Valley. I always wanted to go see. I've never made the trip,
but I think somebody has a replica of this thing
somewhere in Silicon Valley, but there's a few replicas of these in this video we're going
to watch right now, shows an Australian scientist
talking about a replica of the data. The NDP find that because
they want to keep upon by the engine behind me is Babbage's Difference Engine number
2 designed by Charles Babbage, an English mathematician who is also known as the
first computer pioneer. Diabetes designed this
machine 247, 249. Babbage, as we know, did not succeed in completing any of his own engines in their
entirety. So there's By bigger engine, this is the first physical realization
of any of the baby, just complete designs in the metals. The engine itself weighs five tons. It consists of 8 thousand
parts made of bronze, cast iron and steel. And it measures 11 foot
long and eight-foot high. It's operated by cranking a handle. What it does is it
calculates and tabulates the value of any
second-order polynomial. The class of mathematical
expression is 231 decimal places. It only calculates that
with unerring accuracy. It also prints and inked
hard copy as a record of the results and also produces what
are called stereotype plates. That is, it impresses the results
in soft material plus the, in this instance, you can make
it printing like automatically. And the purpose of all this was to eliminate the risk of human error. In the calculation and production
of printed mathematical tables. The machine is operated
by cranking this handle. So you turn this handle and
each cycle of the engine, the machine produces one result. So you just keep cranking your set the initial conditions
up on the figure wheels, on the numbered wheels,
you turn the handle. What happens when you turn the
handle is it drives this cam stack. And if you'd like, this
is the micro program. This is the device that orchestrates
all the internal motions of the machine to get it to form the repeated additions
that are needed for them. The method of differences, which
is the principle it is using. So you turn the handle in terms these camps tax the
28 separate camps. And that's what determines
the internal timing and the orchestration of all the mechanical movements
of the whole machine. So that'll be like the
guts of the machine, the internal Michael program. And what the machine does is it adds a three digit
number on one column, and it progresses through
the machine adding from column to column to column
and the tabular value, the result ends up on the
very last column, 31 digits. So you crank the handle, each cycle of the engine, that's four turns of the handle, it cyclically engine produces
the next result on this column. So the end process, the end product of that whole process is 31 digit number on this column. So we take the 31 digit result from the end of the machine
at the end of the cycle, and it is automatically
transferred to this apparatus, which is the output apparatus.
It does two things. It prints on hard copy In Ink, taught copy, 31 digit result as a checking copy so that you know
actually what you've canceled. At the same time it impresses results on soft material
in these traits. So inside there there are things
called stereotype punches, which are number wheeled, which
are lowered into the tray, the trade and moves, it lowers again. And so the lines build up. Firstly, it's on display here at the Computer History
Museum for one year. It's aren't alone from
the owner of the machine, which is Nathan move old, who commissioned the machine. It paid for the machine to be built. And so it's here for you and then it goes into his
private collection. What we will do with it is
demonstrated for people, will work on it's own
research machines, so it will be adjusted and worked on. We get experience about
how the thing operates. Also part of the reason now that
it is here and it does work. And we have for the first
time that Babbage engine, that is to do some
research into, say, was it a practical proposition
if babies had one, could they have successfully
produce tables? Babbage was not an
impractical dreamer. This machine works as
he intended to work. What's the entire enterprise of using the infallibility of machinery
to produce printed tables. Was it realistic? Could
it have been done? And for the first time in history, we're in a position to
actually answer that question.