So we're at the end of the part of the course where we will talk about time complexity and
the big open question, heirs whether P is equal to np. And what we've established is that it seems likely they're unequal, but wow, it's hard to prove. Why is it so hard to prove? All right, what could explain this? So this is a little more
philosophical discussion here. Well, maybe P equals NP, right? We could be wrong. Maybe P equals NP. But the fastest algorithms for NP
complete problems such as SAT, take some obscene
polynomial running time, like ending to the 100. So this could be possible
and this would kind of explain why we haven't
figured this out yet. So maybe the reason
all natural problems and p have running times that are more modest polynomials is that human intuition can only conceive
of relatively simple algorithms. Right? So we've used the time hierarchy theorem to prove that there's
certain artificial, unnatural problems that require time n to the 100 and can't be
solved in time ended at 90. Now, we don't know of
natural problems like this, but maybe they're out there and we're just not
going to figure it out. Because what would the end of the
100 time algorithm look like? It could look a few different ways, but the most straightforward
way to come up with the algorithm that takes time n to the 100 is to have 100
nested for loops, right? So exponential time algorithms
are pretty simple to write down. You do something like for all x in the set of binary
strings of length n, and that's exponential time. But it's kind of a simple algorithm. Simple in the sense it's
easy to understand, not that it's simple to
execute, it takes a long time, but algorithms that take huge running times maybe are
hugely complex and we're just, we don't have the
intellectual capability with our current understanding
to come up with them. So I liken this to the
unintuitive nature of say, relativity and quantum mechanics. Our intuitions evolved to deal with objects about big enough
that we can see the size 1, one millimeter to one
kilometer, Kilometer. Not enormous gravity
wells that can bend light nor tiny sub-atomic
or atomic particles subject to quantum effects. So there's no reason that these
models that seem to work pretty well for those objects ought to be
intuitive, even other accurate. So similarly, there's no
reason to expect that if the most simple algorithms for
SAT or immensely complicated, that we should be able to
figure them out right now. Okay, Here's another reason
why it might be so difficult. Perhaps they're equal, but the
proof is non-constructive, right? So normally how do you prove that? You know a, a problems
such as SAT is NP. You give an algorithm for us. But there's sometimes are
our algorithmic proofs of the form there exists a
polynomial time algorithm. Right? So sort of like the
pigeonhole principle doesn't say which pigeonhole gets to begins. You could imagine a
non-constructive proof that through some
convoluted reasoning, shows there's a polynomial
time algorithm for SAT that doesn't say
what it is, right? It doesn't actually
give you the algorithm. So if we're just trying to prove
this by searching for algorithms, we're not going to find it this one. And finally, if you know a
little bit about formal logic, there's this notion
that a statement can be independent of the so-called
axioms of set theory, meaning with the way that we reason
about proofs in mathematics. Statement can be independent, meaning there's no
proof that it's true and there's also no
proof that it's false. So it's either true or false, but there's no way to resolve it
by trying to prove it either way. So there are statements like this. So the continuum hypothesis
is the most famous example. This is the statement that there are no set cardinality is strictly in between that of the natural
numbers and the reals. So this is known to be independent. There's no proof that it
is and there's no proof that it, that it's false. So okay, this could be possible, but this seemed a lot
less likely to be true for a statement
like P versus NP then for these uncountably
infinite sort of statements, so consider the following statement. I'll call it star. So
the statement star says, for all n bigger than 1000, there's no Boolean circuit with
fewer than n to the log n gates. That solves all clique
instances of size. Okay, so we haven't gotten too much into using circuits
to decide languages. We've studied them as having interesting decision
problems themselves. But there's a notion that I would get up and do a follow-up version
of this course talking about the relationship between an
algorithm or a Turing machine deciding a problem like league
boolean circuits decided. But one of the first things
we would do is establish that if there's a polynomial
time algorithm for clique, then for particular sizes
of clique instances, there are small Boolean circuits, polynomial size Boolean
circuits that can solve clique. So if clique is not NP, then something like
this would be true. So if P equals NP, then star is false. In fact, you can solve clique with small circuit Canadian
polynomial size. So this would not be true for
all n bigger than a thousand. Now if it, if they're not equal, I may have picked the wrong
threshold at 1000 there, but for some large enough threshold, It's probably true and
thousands probably big enough that if P is not
NP, then this is true. Okay? So here's the difference
between these two cases. If star is false, There's actually a proof
of that fact, right? It's huge. What it would do is on the end
that makes this fault right? So if this is false, There's some m, maybe it's 1001,
maybe it's a million. But for that particular n, there would be no Boolean
circuit with this many. Also a million raised to the 20 or fewer gates that
solves all clique instance. So you could prove
that you could simply enumerate every single
Boolean circuit of that size. And then you could execute
it on the clique instance. And you can execute the
exponential time algorithm for clique on that instance and show that it gets one of the
clique instances wrong. So this can actually be improved. It's a huge, probably
would take forever to actually run the verifier for it, but there is a proof of that. So it can't be false. This statement, P not equal to NP, that cannot be false
and independent, right? So theorem saying the
statement P not equal NP, so precisely the statement star. So if this is independent, right? Then it's true. In other words, we would
actually expect that, you know, if they're
actually independent than, than in fact, P is not NP. Because if they are equal, then we can prove that by proving
some statement like this.