Okay, so now we're going to show that there's an oracle that
makes p unequal to Anki. And there's a lot of
ways to prove this. My favorite actually involves something called
Kolmogorov complexity, but that's a little more involved
to first define all the concepts there are we're going to do here is kind of not the
most rigorous proof. We're going to use some probability, but we're going to a bit about it, but it is kind of slick. So this is more of an
intuitive proof sketch where we're going to play a
few tricks of probability. So we're actually going to
generate the probabilistically. So we're just going to pick B
at random and show that, that, that it's possible that some called the probabilistic method to show there exists a
b by showing there's a positive probability of picking
a B that makes P and NP unequal. So here's what we did.
For each possible string length n. We're going to pick a random
string w of that like. And the way we're going to define
B is any string of length, then that's not w, it's not in B. So B is going to be a
very sparse language. Most strings are not in it. And the string w might be even
that's going to be probabilistic. So we're going to flip another coin. And if it's heads will put
w and b otherwise we want. So B is very sparse. Some string length, it's got
no strings of that length. Others, it has one. But that one is just picked at random and all the others
of that light, they're not. So. Okay, so now we're going to define a problem called affinity Oracle. And this will be the probably show is contained in NP to
be that not in P2P. Although when I say, we'll show it is, well, I mean, probably
that's what's going to happen because we're
picking B at random. We could get very unlucky, like would be, could
be the empty set. And then we're not, this
isn't going to work, but, but probably, you know, with, with some probability
this is going to work. So here's the problem. Finicky Oracle to the b. We're given as input, essentially just a string length, so a urinary string 1 to the n. And the question is simply
this question about B. Is this one of those string
lengths where B has one string? So is there a w and b of length n, or is it one of those string
length that does remember about, we're going to expect about half of all the possible lengths to
have a string of that length, because we're flipping an
unbiased coin to determine whether W goes into b
for that length there. Okay, so the easy observation is finicky Oracle to the
b is an NP to the B. So an input one to the n, you just guess a w of the same length in linear time
and you just ask your Oracle, thank this query obey is w and b. And it's clear that if there
is a string of length n and b, then one of the guesses
will tell it to you, and that means the NP machine
will, will get it ready. Okay, So now all the hard
work is to show that this finicky Oracle to the B problem
is not contained. And Peter. So how do we show that? Well, we let Q be any
polynomial-time be Oracle program that could possibly decided to let Q be any Under the
Sea time, the overall program. And we're going to show probably
it doesn't solve finicky Oracle. So let's imagine what CUDA,
They don't know what it does. It's an arbitrary polynomial
time Oracle program. But on input one to the n, It's going to query some
list of strings in the, maybe the empty list, maybe it makes note where he's, maybe it does. It runs in polynomial time
now runs in time n to the c. So the key query
that many strings, there's at most n to the c strings. Queries asking are they a and B? Now, they may be of
different lengths. It's going to simplify
talking about it if we just assume they're
all the same length, It's just technical details
to handle different lengths. So for the sake of making this brief, let's assume that all the queries
are the same length string. Now suppose that on all of
the strings or queries, you get the answer
false for all of them. Well, in that case, it doesn't really much
matter what the oracle be. Other than that, as long as the Oracle B is false on all
the strings that get queried, then all the strings
that didn't get query, they can be in B or not in B. And q's output is going
to be exactly the same for all of them, right? Because the only information it gets about B is what it makes
through the queries. So now let's just examine this
probabilistically, right? We picked a string at random. So first of all, we picked
at random whether or not to even put in a
string of this length. But let's suppose we did
suppose that there is a string of length n here. Well, what's the probability that one query is on
the w, That's MBB. Well, there's two to the
n strings of length n. Only one of them's and b, we pick that one at random. So the probability that one query hits that one is one is almost one. That's one reason that the probability of one query
hits it is really small. It's 1 over 2 to the n, meaning the probability
that that query is on a different string
where the answer is false is really close to one. It's 1 minus 1 over 2 to the n. Now, you don't make just one query. You actually make several queries, but not that many, not all 2 to the n. Only a
polynomial number of queries can be. So. And we picked these all
uniformly at random up here. So the probability that all n
to the c queries return false. Just this probability times itself, n to the c times, right? And you might recognize this if this number in the denominator
and this number were equal, like if they were
both n, For example, as n goes to infinity, this will approach one over E. But in fact it's, it's not doing. The number in the denominator is way bigger than the number up here. So in other words, this is
getting much closer to one. And we're not multiplying it by itself enough times to bring it down. So in fact, this is going to go
to one as n goes to infinity. So that means that with probability almost a half cuz
output is wrong, right? So Q is just trying to figure out, is there a string of
this length or not, but whether it's
correct or not depends on whether we put a string of
that length in here or not. So if there is in fact a
string of that length, then Qt Q and output one. Otherwise it would
have to add up to 0. But whatever it outputs, It's not even depending on the query because it probably
didn't query string w. So it has probability pretty
close to a half to be wrong. And this is for one particular,
for one particular, and it's probably, it has a
1.5 chance of being wrong. But then there's another
end beyond that. There's n plus 1 and n
plus 2 and n plus three. So the probability that
for some men that gets it wrong is one, right. It's going to get the answer
wrong for one of these trends. So with probability 1, infinity Oracle to the
b is not in T to the B. So in fact a to D and N D
to the D are not equal.