The difference engine
was an amazing design, but it was quite special purpose. So just calculated polynomials to
a certain degree of precision, which can be used to
calculate a lot of other functions through their
Taylor series approximations. But what Babbage realized as weight, you could do quite a
bit more if you could automate computation that sense. And so it inspired him to think of this more complex design or something he called
the analytical engine. And this had essentially everything we think of in modern computers other
than the electricity. So this is like, but the steam pump novels like this
is kind of what people imagine, you know, computers might
have looked like had they actually been
built in the 1800s. It had what's called a store, which we recognize the memories
of 1050 digit integers. Or we might call that a register
with a certain number of bits. Some called the mill. This was basically the CPU. It could do addition, subtraction,
multiplication, division. It was programmable
using these punch cards. So you might have heard
of punch cards being how people tried to program computers in the 60s while they
came from this other technology, which is called the Jaccard blue. Where are these punch
cards would describe a pattern that you
wanted to loom to weave into a woven pattern and
they were extremely complex. I mean, this is actually a pattern woven by a Jaccard loan
showing a picture of Jaccard. And he's cards had
variables that could copy numbers into the mill operations given an instruction execute. And you had these so-called
combinatorial cards, which had the construct
control structures we would recognize
if then statements, gotos and for loops. So, so this is what Babbage
imagined could be used to really expand the automation of computation for say,
computing scientific tables. But it was realized. How much further? And said, Hey, here's a quote from the same. Essentially. And meeting the
analytic decides who's right. So basically any object
relations strand that spreads monies home regions. So for example, represent sound, represented CDs. Then she met with the engine, might be able to
hunger and lows news. This is some video. If you do just showing some
algorithm being what's happening, my algorithm then add it to them. And a lot of people over Fernando, as the first computer program moves, this theater was never modeled. You can write a program, whether she wrote the first
programs for the analytic engine. And this shows a program describing how to compute something
called Bernoulli numbers. I went and tried to look for a simple description of Bernoulli numbers. They're not really
simple description. This might have been
why she wanted this as a demonstration of the power that, you know, there's no simple
like little formula for them. So this is the kind of thing you
have to express algorithmically. And this is a description of the Analytic Engine
programmed people. Now unfortunately, machines in
the 1800s were not precise enough to enable the construction of
a reliable analytic engine. What happened was Babbage
tried to get money from the British government
to fund this thing. They gave him some, but then
they pulled the funding. They were happy with the
progress, never got built. And so that it just kinda
dive there for awhile. But this idea of a universally
programmable computer came up again independently by a totally
different group of actors in the 1930s who were thinking
about a much different question, a much less practical
sounding question. To, which is this abstract question about the foundations of mathematics.