Okay, So with this definition
of relativize programs in mind, let's define a complexity
class based on its hot pizza, the SAT, this is the problems solvable in polynomial
time relative to set. Meaning the problems
you can solve with a polynomial-time program that can call a subroutine
that evaluate sat. And you can implement that
subroutine however you want, but the time spent in it is
not counted against you. It's only the extra time that
needs to be at most polynomial. So this is a so-called
relativize complexity class. One way to think about
this is this is p and a world in which some
website out there exist. It just answers that
question instantly. Okay, so what are some
problems in P to the set? Well, there's one obvious problem
that they know besides the ones in P sacked itself, right? Like obviously if you
have an oracle for SAP, you can use that to solve
the satisfiability program. How about complement of SAT? Think about that on your own. Why is that contain and
P2? If you can see that. Then clique and compliment of clique, these are Bolton p to the set. Pause and think about
why is that true? And we can talk about
it in discussion board. Not only those, but actually any problem in P to
the clique, right? We can make clique
the Oracle instead. And the claim is any problem you can solve with an oracle for clique, you could also solve
instead in polynomial time, you had an oracle for say. Okay, we can define another kind of relativize complexity class where instead of considering
just one Oracle, SAP, we consider, well
what if the oracles, you know, what do we have
more than just that Oracle? In fact, what have we
allow any NP Oracle? So we take, for every a, we will get p to the a and we
take the union over all a and b. So one of the decision
problems in NP is sad. So it's one of the terms
that makes up this union. So obviously p to the SAT is
a subset of P to the envy. What about the other
way? Is that true? Pause and think about that. Okay, So we can think about this P to the NP complexity class
and compare it to sigma p2, sorry, PyPy to Oersted and P2. So an exercise to do at home, which I think in the past
I've assigned as homework. But think about it for
a minute right now. Is to show that P to the NP, which is the same as P to this app, is contained in sigma p2 and
it's also contained in pi t2. So it's in their intersection. So that's not totally obvious, but it's not terribly hard to prove. It's like a homework exercise. So what about the other direction? Because the containment
go the other way. And of course I can't prove it can't, because all these things are being unequal sort of depends
on p not equal. But the right, if they're equal, the whole polynomial
hierarchy collapses. All these things are
equal to each other, but we can show that it's not obvious that the
containment could go the other way. So Let's define this variant with the satisfiability problem
called for all exists SAS. It's a Pi t two problem actually it's complete provide P2 and it's
given a Boolean formula phi, and we're going to kind of
cut the inputs in half. So the first half of the inputs, we'll call x on the x and the
second half we'll call Y1 to Y2. And the question we're
going to ask is, is it the case that for any
bits you can assign to the x's, there is a way to assignments to the wise that makes the
formula equal to one. Okay, So, so this is sort of
obviously a pi t2 problem. It's phrased as a for all
followed by an exists, followed by the circuit
value problem, which is NP. Okay, so we can try to solve this in polynomial time with a SAT Oracle. Because somewhere
SAT is in the middle of this and we can
imagine trying to do it. And if you look at just
this portion, right, exists Y1 two ions such
that this is true. If you sort of fix what the x's are, then this portion of the question is a sac question that we're asking. Once we fix these inputs and just consider them
constants, the X1 to Xn. We just want to know is
that formula satisfiable? There's some insight into the y's. But how would we go about solving the whole
problem with the SAT Oracle? Well, it seems we have to iterate
over all the possible x's. So we can iterate over every
assignment of X1 to Xn in 0, 1 to the end, there's
two to the N of those. And then we could say, well, take that circuit f0
hard-code these particular x's and this iteration
of the loop into it. So that now instead of two n inputs, you've hard-coded the first n, What's remains, or
the other n inputs, you have an n input circuit
you would call side. And then at that point you can
just ask, is that satisfied? Well, that's this
portion of the question. Right? And if not, you return false because you've found a setting that
makes this thing falls. There's, there's no y. But if not, you have to keep going because we have to
verify this for all x's. If you get through all of them, then the answers is yes. This still takes exponential time. Even with the sac Oracle, you still got to iterate over all the possible assignments to
the first half of the inputs. And our intuition is that
this can't be improved. That in fact, having two
quantifiers like this, an exists and for all and exists. It is in fact, more power than
having a single SAP Oracle.