So how are we going to
prove that P is not NP? Probably seen that we can give proofs that separate P from
Xp and np from NXP. So why not p from Np? Alright, Maybe we can
just take the techniques. How to do that? I mean, this diagonalization
technique is sorted chief among them, and push that to separate P from NP. So the next section
shows that a quote, simple simulation
argument like the one at the time hierarchy theorem
uses to show that P is not x. Provably cannot work. Okay? So I use the word provably
there to talk about proofs. So let's dig into a
little what I'm saying. So some mathematicians and many computational complexity
There's favorite as time is so-called
impossibility proofs, which within theoretical
computer science corresponds to proving that a certain type of algorithm cannot
compute something. But their second favorite
pastime that they have on is impossibility of
impossibility proofs, also known as barrier results. And this amounts to proving
that a certain type of technique cannot prove that a certain type of algorithm
cannot compute something. In other words, it's an
impossibility proof on finding proofs that would
get results like this. That's got errands and takes it one level further with
this job for years, people tried unsuccessfully to prove this sort of impossibility
result was impossible. Our result shows the
impossibility of their goal, not aware of any actual
result like that. Sort of a third order
impossibility result. But this second-order one, there are a few of
these and somehow it appears to be unique to
theoretical computer science is a nice blog entry here
talking about how other fields of math don't have the so-called barrier
results too much. I think some people in the
comments get involved to say, well now there's some of
this in math, but it's, it's fairly central to
theoretical computer science. So let's take a look at than the sort of most
straightforward barrier result, which has to do with a concept
called relative position. So let's imagine that your
programming language again, our formal model of computation
here is whatever it is, your favorite programming
language, right? So imagine that it has a
magical instruction that takes one step to execute and the
name of the instruction is set. And it takes as input a Boolean formula and it returns true if and
only if it's satisfied. So in other words, this
instruction magically solves the satisfiability
problem for you. Okay, so we call the language
Saturdays little bit different font. This is the command in your language. This is the language or
decision problem itself. We call that language and Oracle. For this programming language, different use of the
word language there. So we call this decision problem and Oracle for your model of computation. And we call the program that makes calls to this oracle
and Oracle program. Now, I want to emphasize this is
not the same thing as saying, well, suppose that Sackler np and
then studying normal program. So I said one step here. If I said O n cubed steps, everything we study would still hold. But it's not the same
thing as saying, well, suppose there's a
polynomial time algorithm for SAT and that we can call it. It kind of matters here
that we can imagine this thing existing even if
SAT is not engaged, right? You can imagine that's not NP, but still think about, well, what sorts of problems are
efficiently solvable by these SAP Oracle programs
that would sort of run faster than is provably
possible if it's sad, is not empty. And it's not a
contradiction because P is defined by normal
polynomial-time programs, not polynomial-time SAP, Oracle programs that have
this magical instruction. Now if this all seems kind of spooky, there's an alternative
way of thinking about it that might be
more straightforward. Where you just think
about normal programs. And is this just
implement sat, right? It is decidable. There's an
exponential time algorithm for SAT. Use the standard slow
brute force search and use that to implement it. And now you have a
regular programs that can call the subroutine you wrote. But then instead of studying
normal running time, just define the running time
relative to sound of any program, reasonably exclude time
spent in the subroutine. So in other words, if your program runs and it might take
exponential time, but if you subtract off all the time, it takes calling the subroutine and you end up with only a
polynomial number of steps. That would be a program that runs in polynomial
time relative dissect.