Now as I said, this is a
somewhat complex proof. So we're going to start with a
proof that sort of almost works. It's got a high level outline of how we get some of those claims
he talked about before. But we're going to
miss a few details. So the first thing is just
to assume P is not NP. They need that for any of the store. Now, let's imagine the enumerating all the polynomial-time
programs called an Q0, Q1, Q2, et cetera, in some order that
define a as follows. Imagine iterating over
all the binary strings. And we're going to have a
certain notion of a stage. These stages will somehow
correspond to the values of f, that function that F1 appear here. So imagine we're in state 0. If we're in state a and we
start there for every x that we encounter in this
stage and we're going to iterate over x is for
awhile and Stage 0 a, and then we'll switch to Stage 0 B at some point and then continue
at whatever x we are. So for a while will be in Stage
0 and for all those axes, x will equal sapped of x. So this is not an algorithm or
just sort of defining what a is. Now, what we'll do is if on this x, q of x is not equal to sine of x. But then remember we let
a of x these at the x. So in other words, if x is not
satisfiable Boolean formula, and therefore we would
have set x to be 0 if it's not a satisfiable
Boolean formula. But Q0 of x says yes. We'll switch to save 0 b or if it is satisfiable Boolean formula
and Q to 0 that says No. Also we'll switch to state 0 dB. So as soon as q 0, the first polynomial-time
program disagrees with SAT. Then we'll switch. And if P is not NP, this has to hold for every single
one of these kittens, right? Because none of them can
solve SAT if P is not NP. So what does it mean? Well, it means Q0 does not solve a because we made
Q0 disagree with that. We said a to B sat air, but that's not equal
to accuser says so we've kept Q0 from
solving the problem. Heck? Now we'll switch
to the next stage 0 B, and then Stage 0 b. Now, this is corresponds to letting
that function f go up by one. Now we just let ants be false
for all the x's we encounter. We had some initial number
of strings where we did this and then now we started
the next string after that, let ants be false for strings. But each time we're going
to look at clique of x, meaning is x an encoding of a graph and a k such that the
graph has a clique of size k. We just, anyway, any NP
problem can work here. So he does look at this
NP-Complete problem and say, is this different than what? A of q 0 of x ducts? So a couple things to note here. One, note that we have this dual role for the polynomial-time programs. Here I talked about him like the output Booleans for
deciding decision problems. Here I talk about it like the output
strings for doing reductions. So that's just a technicality that makes it a little
easier to talk about it. We could also have said in
the AES stages will only look at functions that will only look
at programs that return booleans. And in these stages will only look at programs that
returns strings. But, you know, you can define
them in some uniform way where it just always
returns a string. And if the string is nonempty, you consider that true. And if it's empty, you consider it false as a Python does, for example, with, with it's sort of
like Boolean interpretation of all it's datatypes. So the point is now we actually
look at the string output of Q0. And then we ask, is that straight not x, but does that string in a or not? And then we ask, is that the same
as what clique says about x? So okay, what's going on here? Why, why do we say that we
want to switch at this point? Well, this is just a
way of saying that q, q 0 does not reduce
clique to edge, right? What would it mean to reduce
clique to a mean on input x? You want to run
through the reduction. If the reductions Q is 0, the output of that will be q of x. And you want that x is in clique
if and only if Q of x is in a. But if we detect that, that condition fails, showing maybe clique is reducible
to a but not through Q0. Q0 is not a proper
reduction of clique to a. If we find this so great, we've prevented Q0 from being a reduction from clique to
a, which is what we wanted. But now that's just one program
that runs in polynomial time. We have an infinite number of
other ones to worry about. And note in particular, whatever q 0 of X is, call it y, maybe before
or after x and the order. Okay, so the other
stages looks similar except they cover other
polynomial time programs. So stage, stages 11, b are about Q1. They ensure that Q1 doesn't solve a, nor does it reduce clique to a stage to ensure as
q2 does not solve a, nor does it reduce
clique to a, and so on. So, well, we needed out of this is that P is not NP, and therefore, you can find eventually a, a QO as an SRA, An x which Q0 and sat must
disagree because that doesn't have any
polynomial time program. So, so what's missing
from this, right? So this kinda looks like
the proof we dated. It looks like none of those
polynomial-time programs because of the a's stages, none of them decide a
because of the bees stages, none of them reduce clique day. So kind of looks like
we got what we wanted. A is not in P, But it's
not NP-Complete either. So here's the missing details. Is a itself in NP. How do we know we don't
just get something undecidable as a
result of doing this, we actually want this to be an NP, to have a non-trivial statement. How do we enumerate all the
polynomial-time programs? The problem and given as input, a program, is it polynomial time
or not, is actually undecidable. So in particular, if we're going
to use this enumeration to, to define a, a had
better be decidable. And so we can't just say, oh, we have to enumerate
all the polynomials and programs in order to
define what a is. Does each stage n, right? So I'm sort of assuming here I argued about why the eighth stages n, but we need that for each queue
for infinitely many n, right? So no matter when we start a stage, we need that there's some bigger
X that will end the stage. To end the eight stages, you need, no matter what x you start at as you iterate through the strings x, from that point, you had better find a bigger one where q
i and sat disagree. And for the bees stages, you'd
better find a bigger one where a clique of x and a
of q i of X disagree. Now both of these are going to use this hypothesis that
p is not equal to NP.