Okay, so here is the theorem that no proof resolving P
versus NP can relativize. And if that, whichever
way the answer goes, there's an oracle that
makes it go the other way. So there's an article a so that P and NP are equal in the
relativize world of Oracle a. There's another Oracle bead
so that they're unequal in the relativize world of Oracle be. So we're going to start with a. It's slightly easier one to do. So we're going to define that Oracle to be this
problem we call predict. And we saw a variant
of this earlier where predict had a certain time-bound
hard-coded and do it. This one similar except
the time bound is now part of the input to
the decision problem. So we're given a program
Q and an input x, we want to know what is Q on x gonna do within a certain amount of time. The time is given as the third input. And here, because of some
technicalities in the proof below, we're going to want the time
to be written in binary. And we want to know does QX
output yes, within T steps? Okay? So we're going to go by a
series of subset inclusions here. So the first thing
we're gonna do is show X is contained in P to the a. So let E be an arbitrary
element of XP, write some decision problem. Solvable in exponential time to, to the n, to the c
for some constant c. And let's call the
program solving it QB. Okay? So we can decide if x is, if a given input x is an E
with an N to the C time, a polynomial-time program
that queries this a Oracle. What in fact, we can just make one query and just report its answer. It's a so-called mini one reduction. What's the query? Pause
and think about them. All right, So essentially
we just want to ask, what does QE do on input x, right? When I'm going to run QV. If we did, it would take time
to to the end of the sea. That's no good. We need to
hold in end of the zeta, not two to the n to the c. So we're not going to run
Q0, we're just going to ask our Oracle a, what would q0 do on input x if
you ran it for this many steps, the number of steps it needs to haul. And because this number of steps is enough to allow QV
to actually finish, this is its running time. The answer here will be the same. The answer is running at completion, and that's
the answer we want. So in polynomial time with access to this oracle
a, we can solve it. And he was an arbitrary element of X. So X is contained in PDA. Okay? Now let's consider an arbitrary
element of NP to DA, right? Some, some other problem, l, It's an NVDA. What does that mean? Well, it's decidable by non-deterministic program
that runs in polynomial time, let's say n to the c Islam constancy. But it's an Oracle program and
has access to this oracle. A. Let's call it q. Okay, so the first
observation is that this, this program might make query. But we want to bound how
big the queries can get. In particular, how big can the, the third element yet? Well, it's polynomial time and
it runs in time n to the c. And in time n to the
c, you can only write down into the sea possible bets. So overwriting t and binary and we can only
write end of the seat bets. That means the value
of T is at most two to the n to the c. Bigger
values require more bits, so the value t can't get much
bigger than this exponential. So we're going to use
that to arguably can replace each of those queries with a deterministic subroutine that executes the program q on input
y for this many steps. Right? And just answers the question directly without
consulting the oracle. A. So this would make QL, the decider for L, into still a
non-deterministic program. And they wouldn't be polynomial time anymore because we've replaced the one step oracle queries with
this exponential time subroutine. Now the time will be
something like n to the c, the number of queries we might make times the time needed for each query, which is two to the end of the sea. But there's no oracle. And oh, it's a
non-deterministic program. This subroutine and the
one accounting for most of the time here is deterministic. So there's still only
a polynomial number of non-deterministic bits. So that's going to be crucial. We're not, we're running an exponential time
nondeterministic algorithm, but we're not choose a
non-deterministic bits on every step. It's a very small part
of that computation. So if we now want to
convert that into a deterministic program by
iterating over all the possible, I know just brute force searching all the possible values for
the non-deterministic bits. We can do that. We can iterate over, well, how many possible n to the c length bit strings are
there today into the sea. So that means now we
have these two loops, one of which iterates over all the non-deterministic bits in
this non-deterministic program. And then within each
of those were possibly making this many
calls to this oracle, which had been replaced by this other exponential
times everything but the whole time there is what
is going to be two to the n to the c times two to the end
of the c times n to the c, which is itself at most, say two to the n to the c. That's
O of 2 to the 3 end of the sea. Well that's still exponential
to bigger exponential, but it's still Quote,
merely exponential. So L is an XP, right? We got rid of the non-determinism
and we got rid of the Oracle. So at the cost of it takes longer, so NP to the a is contained in XP. Again. Then finally, the easy observation, p to the a is contained in
NP to DA no matter the work, right, by the same reasoning, you can solve a problem even if you need access to an
Oracle in polynomial time, well, you can verify it with access to the same or
in polynomial-time. So putting those
three facts together, we have xp is in NP to
the a, which is in P. But it was already then PDA, which is an NP to the
a, which is an exp. So in fact, all of these are equal.