All right, so here we're
going to step away a bit from these relativize
complexity classes. There's a lot of interesting
facts about them, but the main reason we brought
him up is to highlight this first sort of barrier result involving a certain type of proof technique called
a relative Ising proof. So simulation arguments, meaning essentially the time that we use to prove all sorts of results so far, where one algorithm is
going to simulate another. They have a crucial property. They all work even
if all the programs involved in the argument
are Oracle program. As long as they all have access
to the same Oracle problem a. And this holds no
matter what the oracle, it could be undecidable in fact. So a proof like this, we say it relativize is, and every proof we've seen
so far has this property. So theorems relating
complexity classes using simulation arguments also show that all the relativize complexity classes obey the exact same relationship. So for example, for any Oracle a, this first statement that we showed. So this is not the time hierarchy that this is not a
strict subset here. This is just if you allow
a running time of g. And then if you allow a
bigger running time t, So g, g of n equals big O of T
of n. Well then you can at least do as many dead, right? So in other words, all
the problems solvable in time g are also solvable in time t, because t is at least as big. Well that holds even if
you're talking about problems solvable by a Oracle programs, right? Is just observing that the
amount of time needed, G is at most O T of
n. So, so that holds. We still have that p to the a
is a subset of NP to the a, which is a subset of X to the a. The time hierarchy there and
still holds in all its glory. He's like problems solvable in exponential time with
access to an a or a goal includes and problems not solvable in polynomial
time even with access to an a. If there's any problem complete for NP to the a that
is also e to the a, then in fact those two are
equal, that still holds. So now we're going to see a non magical justification for thinking about
these magical oracles. And it's this that no proof resolving the P versus NP
question Can relative eyes. So all of the proof techniques
that we used up here that just involved one program
simulating another. Those all relativize if the
simulating program needs to simulate an Oregon instruction
in the simulated program, but it has the same oracle itself. It can just use it. So something other than just simulation arguments have got to be used to
resolve this question.