So one of the problems
we mentioned with the almost proof of
landowners theorem previously about there being an NP intermediate problem is that
at some point we said let Q0, Q1, Q2, et cetera, be an enumeration of all the
polynomial-time programs which exist. They can be mathematically defined, but at some point, because they're
enumeration in that order will influence the definition
of our intermediate problem a, and we want it to be contained in NP. We need some way of enumerating them. That, that's going to be decidable, that it's going to be computable. So okay, let q i be the EI
program in lexicographical order. For that right now is to find you, I just BDI program, so you just enumerate all
the possible strings. Some of them are valid Python
programs and others aren't. Qi is the eye valid one that the Python interpreter doesn't
find any syntax errors. Now, not all of them
are polynomial time. We only want to enumerate programs
that are polynomial time. But as he said, we cannot simply
enumerate all programs and pick out the polynomial-time ones
that's undesirable to do that. So what we're gonna do
is we're only going to enumerate programs with a
so-called self alarm clock. So those with a header that
defines constants c and k that count their steps and then quit after c times n to the k steps. So let's see an example of that
in action, I'll use Python. So I put a lot of scare quotes there, but I really just referring to
what we're going to round here. So let's imagine we have
a polynomial-time program like this one that computes the
greatest common divisor of a, couple of integers a and b, and then it just calls that function. So let's imagine you have this, this is polynomial time, but it's not a clocked version of it. We're going to make a three times n to the seventh clocked
version of this program. So that time-bound is bigger than
the time this needs, this thing. It is quite a bit faster
than O of n to the seventh. But we're just showing that we
can put a clock on this thing and that will time it
out if it runs too long, even though this one won't run into. So the way we make the clot
version of the programs, we start with the program, but I'm kind of drawn a level sparsely there cuz we're
going to have more code here. So first of all, it has a
header mean just some parts at the beginning that
define this constant c, which is 3, this constant k, the exponent which is seven. And then a couple of
global variables, time and time limit. And the first thing the
program does is it figures out the input length and then
computes the time limit, which is that in this example is three end of the
seventh in general, it's c times n to the k. Okay? And then it assigns them
that global variable. The next transformational
do is before every other statement
in the whole program, we want to count how many
statements we execute will take a statement to be
like one time-step. We add a call to this
function called tick. And then what does tick? Tick is this function, it increments this global
variable time starts at 0 and it just compares time to time
on that than ever exceeds that, it prints timeout and exits. So as long as this timeline that we
wrote down here is longer than the actual
time the program takes. We will never execute. This will never hit exit, right? So we haven't changed the behavior of this program other than to slow
it down by a constant factor. Right? So in particular, we're only going to enumerate
the self clocked programs. So we're going to miss most
polynomial time programs. Most polynomial time
programs don't have this alarm clock
attach to themselves. But here's the key. Any problem in P has infinitely many polynomial-time
program solving. And you take any program that works to start adding comments to it. It doesn't change the behavior, but that's a different program technically that solves
the same problem. And one of them is a self
clocking program, right? For any polynomial time program, there's a self clocked version
of it as we just showed you. And so even if we only include
those were not hitting all the polynomial time
algorithms, but we don't need to. We think of the algorithm as being representative of the
decision problem it solves. We are including all
the problems in P. Is for every problem in P, There is a self clocked program with a big enough value on the clock, bigger than the actual
running time in the program so that,
that program works. And then what's nice about
the self clocked programs? Well, they're all
polynomial time, right? They all track their own time. And they all have a polynomial time at some constant times n raised
to some other constant. So every one of them
is a polynomial time, but we can hit every
polynomial time problem. Okay, So now when I refer to you, I don't mean the EI program in lexicographical order or even
the IT, polynomial-time program. I mean the self clocking
polynomial program. And that's the enumeration
that we're going to use. And of course, it's easy to
enumerate programs in that way.