Now we've seen that a
whole lot of problems that are in NP that have
polynomial-time verifier is, are either in p, they have polynomial time algorithms, decide them, or their NP-complete. So a natural question is, are there any problems
that are neither? And this is so-called
gladness theorem, and it says yes, shows
the existence of so-called NP intermediate problems. So if P equals NP, well then every problem in P other than the empty set and Sigma
star would be NP complete. But so Lander's theorem is conditional on P not
equal to negative eight. And it says If they're not equal, then there is an
intermediate problem. There's a problem a in NP that is neither empty nor is it NP-complete. Now, as with the time
hierarchy theorem, a is not a natural problem we constructed artificially just
to show that there's theorem. So the only goals of the
proof are going to be to ensure one that a is
actually in NP, right? And it's easy to do this if
you don't care if it's an NP, like the halting problem is, is not in NP, so it can't be
either NP complete or NP. But the key is that we want to show there's something actually in
between NP-Complete and B. So the only thing we want
to show is it's an NP, but it's not contained in P, and neither is an NP-Complete. So if we draw the Venn diagram of P and P and the NP complete problems, we know that if any
problem in NP is not NP, then none of the
NP-Complete problems are. But that leaves open the
possibility that the union of NP-Complete and p could be NP. But this is showing now
there's something in between. Now it does seem likely
that some natural problems, For example, problems
related to factoring, could be NP intermediate as well. But we don't really have
evidence of that for factoring other then we don't know
how to show their entity. There is fairly strong evidence a factory and it's not NP-complete, but I think maybe less strong
evidence that is not NP. Okay, So this is a
fairly complex theorem. And including the fairly
complex proof of this theorem. So we're going to start by just
defining the problem and see as sort of a high level outline of how we define it so as
to get the property X2. So first we're going to talk about the satisfiability
problem in this kind of functional notation where
it's like a predicate. So sack of x is true if and only if x is a binary string that encodes
a satisfiable Boolean formula. So we're going to kind
of bounce between thinking of this as a
structured data like it's a, it's a Boolean formula
versus it's just a string. Now we're going to define a very slowly increasing function from natural numbers
to natural numbers. And we're going to use that function. Define this problem a. And it's going to be the
case that on an input x. So now just think of x as a string. If it's length given in that,
when we take its length, give it to f. If the
output of that is even, then for strings of that length, we're going to define a to equal set. In other words, a of x equals sine x. And if f of the length of x is odd, we just say false, right? Does that string is not in a. So f is going to
increase very slowly, although it's kind of hard to
show it increasing really slowly and get a example picture
how this is going to look. But the idea will be that as you iterate through all
the possible strings, a is going to look like it's
just going to agree with the SAC problem on every
string for very long runs, while f does not change. And then at some point
F will go up by one. It will change from even to
odd when it changes the odd, now we'll switch to the constant false predicate for long
runs, switching forever. So here's kind of an
example of how it looks. Here is just the satisfiability
language, right? Which is just a series
of yes or true, false answers to every
possible string. Then here's the string length 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on. And then here's just an
example of how f might looks. It starts at 0 and then
eventually goes up to 1, and then eventually
it goes up to two. And in reality it's
going to go very slowly, would probably be 0 for a very long time and then
one for a very long time. But I couldn't fit all
that into the example. So then how does that influence
what, hey, it looks like? Well, while f is even so it's 0, it's just going to
look like Saddleback. So a und sagt just
agree on every string. But then when f switches the
odd now acts, it's just false. In other words, none of
these strings or NA. And then oneth increases again, gets back to even now it
agrees with that again. So SAT isn't really being used in a crucial way or we can substitute
any NP-Complete problem. I thought about
presenting it that way, but I don't know. I feel being concrete
is a little easier, but you don't really have
to think about these as being answers to
satisfiability queries. It's just any NP-Complete problem
you right here, this would work. And any problem in P
would work here, right? So we're switching
between making eggs look like an NP complete
problem and making it look like a problem
in NP is just that sac is kind of your standard
NP complete problem. And the constant false
predicate, right? But just say no language. That's sort of the, the
standard easiest problem in NP. But you can substitute
this would be in, say answer is to 3
SAT when f is even. And then answers to
bipartite matching when, when f is 0, that would also work. Okay, Now by careful design of F, we're going to ensure a few things. One, that f is computable in time, polynomial in it, right? And because we need to compute
f to figure out the answer to a that will at least
ensure a is in NP, right? So the nondeterministic
algorithm will be able to run in
polynomial time in order to determine should a look like SAP or shouldn't look
like the empty predicate. We're also going to ensure that no polynomial-time program solves a. So a is not NP, right? That's going to be key of course. And then finally, we're
going to show that no polynomial-time program
reduces clique to a. So a is not NP complete
either, right? If you could show this, this is, knowing that a is in NP, together with an NP-Complete
problem reduces to it, is what it means for
it to be NP-Complete. So if you remember that the time
hierarchy there and that had a similar condition to what
2 and 3 look like here and drain no polynomial-time
program did a certain thing. Here we got to worry about
two things they might do. They might solve a good AMP. We don't want that. They might reduce clique to a showing it's NP-complete. We don't want that. Now as a saint, I'm just using
a concrete example here. I could put any NP-Complete
problem there and it would work. I think the book might use the
same problem for both of these, which I didn't like
because it kinda made it look like they have to
be the same problem. They don't put any
NP-Complete problem here, any problem in P here, and any NP-Complete problem
you want air to prove Stokes.