Okay, so now we're going to get
into some of the principles of designing these reductions
will do a lot of example. One important reminder from
the textbook to keep in mind the reductions responsibility
is to translate the question, not to answer it, right? We translate an instance of
one problem into another, but the reduction itself has no idea whether the answer to
either one of them is yes or no. And another got you to
keep in mind that when we want to show a
problem is NP complete. The new one we're,
we're trying to show, we're going to reduce an existing
NP-Complete problem to it, not the other way around. It's a common mistake. Okay, so let's define a new problem. Now we haven't talked about before
to variant of Satisfy Ability. We're given a three CNF formula fee. And in 3 SAT we want to know is there's some
assignment that satisfies it. Here we're asking a
different question. We want to know, is there
an assignment that makes every clause have two
unequal liberals? And we say that such
an assignment NA ie satisfies V. So what does that mean? Well, one way to satisfy a CNF formula clause is
to make every literal in it, but you also just have
to make at least one. All right, So some ways of satisfying
it would not NAEP satisfied, but not every NA ie, satisfying assignment is
a satisfying assignment because if you have
two unequal literals, well then there's a true
literal in nursing. So here's an example. If we set a equals 1, b is 0, C is one, D is 0. You can notice by
the colors here that every clause has got at least
a one and also at least a 0. So because they all
have at least a one, it's satisfied, but it's a stronger
constraint than to satisfy. Now, one of the things
that's nice about this problem is that unlike 3-sat, it treats true and
false symmetrically. All right? We just have to make
sure there's at least one of each in each clause. And this makes it useful for
other NP hardness reductions. The first thing we're gonna
do is show how this is related to 3 coloring. And in the 3 coloring problem, colors are symmetric, right? No one color is special. The way that a true value
is special in a clause that only a single true value
can make the clause true, whereas they all have to be
false to make the clause false. So that's what makes
this a little more adaptable to those other problems. But first, we have to
show that it's somehow related to normal satisfiability. So we want to show that this is NP. So we're going to show that any E3 SAT is reducible
to three, so hat. And therefore NA E3
SAT is NP-complete. So how can we do that? Well, we're given a
three CNF formula phi, which is an instance of an A3. So we want to output a formula
Phi prime an instance of 3 SAT, so that this is NA ie satisfiable if and only if Phi
prime is satisfied. So we'll do that by
replacing each clause in FY with these two clauses. If we have x or y or z. And again, these can
be literals and these could themselves be
negations, which means save. If x was the negation of an input, NOT x would just be the input. For instance. So we have to show that
fees and E satisfiable if and only if Phi prime is
just normally satisfiable. So in the forward direction, if feed has an assignment that makes this clause have at least one true
and at least one false literal. That's what it means to
be an a is satisfiable, then that will also be true
of not x or not y or not z, because you're just flip all of them. So you'll still have at least
one true and at least one false. Which means that this
thing will be true, right? That the conjunction of the two, so this is a satisfying assignment. Okay, so the slightly trickier
wanted to go the other way. So now we'll show that
if phi is satisfiable, then f0 is NA ie satisfiable. So observe that any
assignment that satisfies phi prime has to make
X or Y or Z true. Because an estimate,
both of these two. So that means at least one of x, y, and z is true. And it also has to
make not x or not y or not z true mean it has
to make at least one of X, Y, or Z falls, right? Which again, what does this mean? The two of these together
means that at least one of X, Y, or Z is true and at
least one is false. And therefore this clause in the original formula
is NA ie satisfied. So we've successfully reduced
and a 3 SAT to 3 SAT. But now it's time to check yourself. Is this what we're
supposed to do to show any 3 SAT is NP-complete. So think about that for a second. Now, I, I wanted to get a bit
of practice with reductions, but I also wanted to
get you thinking this is the wrong direction, right? This is not how we show that
any E3 SAT is NP-complete. If we already know that
3 SAT is NP-complete, we've gotta go the other way. Well, remember for this
whole section we're going to assume that 3 SAT is NP-complete. And in order to use that fact, we have to reduce it to a new problem to show the
new problem is NP complete. Okay, so how are we going to do that? Well, we're going to start
with a slightly easier to ask, which is to show that NAD for
SAT is NP complete, right? So this is a slight variant where you allow for literals per clause. And we're going to show
that 3 SAT reduces to that, and that's the right direction to go. We're assuming 3 SAT is NP-complete. And it's fairly clear
that NA for SAT is in NP. So if we can show that it's
that 3 SAT reduces to it, we will have shown any
for SAT is NP-complete. So this is a restatement of what a reduction like that
has to look like. We need that feed the input to 3. Sat is satisfiable if
and only if the output v prime of r reduction
is NA ie satisfied. Okay, so here's I will
do the replacement. If V has these clauses, we're going to take those
exact causes and then just add one more literal in each clause. That's why it becomes force ahead. And it's going to be
the exact same literal, just a brand new variable
S that we didn't. Okay? So how can we show this is true when we show each
direction separately. This is always how
you should do this. So in the forward direction
of Phi is satisfiable, then at least one literal
in each clause is true. And in that case, we can set S equal to false and keep the rest of the
assignment the same. And that will make sure that the prime has at least
one true literal, that it's x or y or z, and at least one false literal S. So now suppose conversely, we want to show the
reverse direction that V prime is NA ie satisfiable
by some assignment x. X represents an assignment
of truth values to these variables, including us. So first of all, we're going to claim that
the negation of any, any satisfying assignment is
also an E satisfy, Right? And think about that. If you
have at least one true and at least one false
literal in every clause, if you negate the entire assignment, it just swaps true and false around. So you maintain that
there's at least one true and at least one
false in every clause. So there's two possibilities. The satisfying assignment
x does NA ie satisfying assignment x for v prime and
either sets S to true or false. So suppose that sets us to true. Well that's going to be inconvenient. So we'd rather have us be false. But what we can do is negate
the entire assignment. And by this claim, well that's also an N, a
satisfying assignment. And now we get to assume S is false. And if S is false, and yet these all have at least one true and at
least one false literal. That means at least
one of X, i, y, i, or ZI in each clause
has gotta be true. So just restrict in that
assignment to the x, y's, and z's. It's a satisfying assignment for me.