So we'll talk about one final
alternative definition of NP. This definition was actually the first and the reason for the letter N in the name NP stands for
non-deterministic, right? It does not Stanford not, and B is not called,
not automobile time. It means nondeterministic
polynomial time. So here's how we formalize
it with our kind of semi-formal programming
language model. We imagine we have a new instruction
in our language that has an OR in it that represents one of two
different things we could do. So we might say go to
line three or line 9. Or we might say, we have a bit b, we want to assign it to be 0 or one. And the idea is, you don't know which one the
program's going to do. You could think of it like random. But I like the word
non-deterministic. Better just could do either one. You have no idea
which one it will do. So with an instruction like this, the program computation forms a tree configurations
instead of just a sequence. So you have your
initial configuration and you might have some deterministic instructions and there's just one next configuration, does one next configuration. But if you reach one, now the current instruction is one of these nondeterministic commands. Well then there's two
possible next configurations, and those form the two
subtrees of this tree. And then you get a
tree of computation. The leaves represent when you halt. And the leaves might
have different answers. Some might call with a no and
others might call with a yes. So the condition that we
say the machine or no, it has to just give
one answer, right? So we say that the machine accepts if at least one of these
branches as a yes, even if some others have a no, and it only rejects if every single branch
terminates with a number. So if the non-deterministic guesses are interpreted as
flipping random coins, then you can express
this with probability. You say the program
accepts if and only if the probability of
outputting yes is positive. In other words, there's at
least one leaf here with a yes. So NP can be defined as the class
of problems solvable in a sense, by a polynomial-time
non-deterministic. So polynomial time
here would mean that every single root to leaf
branch would have length, at most some polynomial of the length of the
input specified up here. Now with this one,
with this definition, That's a little more straightforward
to see that P is a subset of NP because p represents
deterministic computation. And the deterministic computation
is just a special type of tree where every single node except the one unique
leaf, has a single trial. So let's justify now that this is actually equivalent to
the other definition. So we have this
non-deterministic computation versus deterministic computation. You're provided with this witness. So here's the sort of
original definition of NP. We start. And let's just point out. We say x is an a if and only
if there exists a witness w, Not too long, such that the AV
verifier accepts the pair X W. So the sort of heart we have to show that this is equivalent
to the other definition. So the idea is that how can you represent this as a
non-deterministic computation? And the idea is we
can turn this sort of deterministic verification where
the witness kinda comes from nowhere into a non-deterministic
computation where the very first step of the
computation is guess the witness. So that would look like this. This would look like guessing
a two or a three bit witness. And then once you've
got that witness guest, now it's simply a
deterministic computation to run the verifier for a v. Now that you've got
both x and the witness. So in other words, like first guessing the witness and then checking it
is a special type of non-deterministic computation
where all the non-determinism is sort of frontloaded. That happens all at
once at the beginning. And then it's deterministic
from there on out. And it's not too hard to prove the other direction that if you have a arbitrary non-deterministic
computation where maybe these nodes and
repairing in the middle, you can turn that into a verifier. And essentially, the
witness in that case would represent the various bits that gets selected at
each of the nodes.