So let's move to another problem. And unlike the ones we've
talked about so far, this is one that's fundamentally
an optimization problem, although we're going to talk
about a decision version of it. So here's the cartoonish
setting from the textbook. I'm planning a cocktail party
from an academic acquaintances. However, there are a
number of rivalries among pairs of people who glare at each other and salt
each other's work and generally render the
conversation like tires. And I'd like to arrange
a gathering that is as large as possible,
the optimization part. But I want to make sure that I don't invite both members of
any of these pairs. So we can formalize that as
we often can with a graph, G equals V E, where the edges in E represents rivalries and the nodes
represent the people. So we define a subset
S of nodes to be independent if no two nodes
in S are adjacent, right? So if you have a set S and there was no edges between any
nodes, it's independent. And if the edges represent rivalries, that means everybody in
that set gets along. Alright, so these
would be a candidate set of people to invite to the party. But of course you want to find, you want to have the
largest party possible. So you would like to have the
largest independent set in G. So that's the optimization
problem that we want to study. Now, the way that we formalize
this as a decision problem, right? Rather than outputting
the independent set or the size of the independent set, we get a second input. And we say the input is a graph G and an integer K. It's a threshold. And the goal is to find an
independent set of size, at least K. Or put another way you want
to answer the question, is there an independent
set size at least k? So in this case, here's
an example graph and there is an independent
set for red nodes. You can verify there's no
edges between any of them. And if you stare at it a
little, little longer, you can see there's no way to add any new nodes to that while keeping it independent,
so it's maximal. It's also maximum mean, meaning there's no other set of
size five that's independent. So here's a very related
concept, a clique. All right, so a clique is a subset of nodes that are
all adjacent to each other. So in some sense, this
is a dual concept, independent set, independent set. You need no edges in a clique. You need every pair of
nodes that have edges. And the goal would be given
a graph to find a clique of size at least K to related
optimization problem. Now if you look at the exact
same graph we had above, that, the biggest
clique you can find, which is just size 2, doesn't seem to be all that related to the biggest independent
set you've been fine. But I'm going to claim these problems
are more or less equivalent. So pause right now and
think about why these are not merely reducible
to each other, but really easily reducible. They're practically the same problem. And the reason is that. You can take what's
called the dual graph. In other words, you keep the
exact same set of nodes, but you just flip the edges. In other words, remove all the edges in the
original graph and then add edges between every pair of
nodes that didn't have them. This one's a little harder
to visualize the edges. But if you think about what
happened in the original graph, since no pair of nodes
in the set had edges. And since we're flipping
all the edges now, every pair of nodes is going
to have edges down here. In other words, in
this graph up here, a set is independent if and only if it's a clique in this
dual graph down here. So that very easy
transformation allows you to, to sort of reduce one problem. That's why they're
practically the same problem. Now here's another concept from
graph theory, vertex cover. And we say a vertex cover
is a subset of nodes where all of the edges have at
least one endpoint in the subset. And the bigger you
make the vertex cover, the easier it is for me to
sort of cover all the edges. And so unlike clique
and independent set, where it gets harder to find one, the bigger you make the
threshold vertex cover is more like a minimization problem. The smaller you want
the vertex cover to be, the harder it might be to find. A trivial vertex cover
would just be every node. So it's not the same problem. And yeah, I'm going
to claim it's again, almost the same as independent set. So pause for a second and
think about why that is. So here's a vertex cover. And if you kinda look at this and
you look at the independent set, you can see that they're
complements of each other. Right? So let's think about, is that an accident? That, that the complement of this independent set ended
up being a vertex cover. Well, no, you're going to have that. It, S is independent if and only if its complement V minus
S is a vertex cover. The idea is, none of these nodes
have edges between them, right? None of them have edges between them. So every single edge in the graph
is either between two nodes, the art in this independent set, or if it touches one of
the nodes in the set, then the other node
is not in the set. So if you just take
the compliment, right, you know that every single
edge in the graph has gotta be incident on one of
these nodes here, right? Then no edge can be between two of the nodes that you left out
because it was independent. So again, by a very easy
transformation of an instance of independent set to an instance of vertex cover could solve one of
them if you could solve the other. Okay? And then this slide
is just summarizing that. So S is an independent set, is equivalent to V minus S
is a vertex cover, right? And then that's
equivalent to S. It is a clique and the so-called
compliment graph. So when you're looking
for a set of size k, all of these are solvable
in time O of n to the k, where n is the number of nodes. So you might think, well that
looks like polynomial and n to the k is polynomial, right? Well, n to a constant,
this polynomial, right? So n cubed as polynomial, n to the fourth is polynomial, but k here is the size of
the set we're looking for. And that might be as big as the
number of nodes in the graph. So in the worst case, this could be like time n to the n, That would be exponential. So it's polynomial if k
is indeed a constant, if all you care about is
finding cliques of size 3, those are also called triangles. Well, that's solvable in cubic time. But if you care about general, okay, well then it's
x, it's exponential. So here's some other variants of
this independent set problem. One is given a graph, we would like to find
an independent set of maximum size that's more or less the optimization version
of the problem, right? Another related problem,
which is a decision problem, is given a graph and
a threshold k, right? Instead of asking, does G have an independent set
of size at least K, we're asking, does its largest
independent set has size exactly k? So a question to ask is, is this problem in NP? It kinda looks like it is, right? Remember I warned you to look for decision problems where it looks like the solution is some object
you want to find, right? So this sounds like, oh, it's an NP and the proof would be the largest
independent set, right? You just verify that it has size k. Well, except how would you
know it's the largest, right? What if the answer is no? What if I ask the question, does G have an independent
set of size ten? Right? If I give you an independent
set of size nine, that doesn't prove that there's
no larger one of size 10. So this problem is not
obviously in Endgame.