Okay, Now we're going to move
on to some reductions that show why I like this
textbook better than others. So it's very common for NP-completeness proofs
to involve these sort of classical combinatorial problems on graphs and formulas
are sets of integers. And those are great. But there's a lot of other places
where it shows up. And one model I like to
think about a lot because of my work and molecular
self-assembly is Thailand. So we're going to
abstract away a lot here, but we'll say that in this model, a tile is a so-called poly mono, meaning a connected
union of unit squares. So there's a single unit square, there's one on top of another. There's one next to each other. Here's four unit squares. Here's four in a
different arrangement. And the tiling problem
is given a set of tile shapes like maybe
these and a region R, So just some bigger union of
unit squares, the squares. The question is, can RB tiled, meaning covered exactly with non-overlapping and possibly
rotated copies of the tiles and t. So Here's an example. Suppose that our tile
shape is just this. We only have one in the set. But remember this can
be rotated as well. Can we cover this
three-by-three square rooted? So pause and think about
that for a second. So we can't, because as you can see, each time we put a tile down, we'll be covering two squares, but there's nine squares here. And we can only cover an even number
of squares with this one top. So this tile cannot be
used to tile this region. So how about this one? We again have a height to a
two by one rectangle here. And there is an even number of
points in this region, right? It's a, it's an eight
by eight square, had to location to remove, so they're 62 points. So can we cover this pause
and think about that one? So this is a little trickier. It turns out you can't,
and it's kind of a cool, clever argument to see
that you imagine sort of coloring each unit
square in the tile. And if you think about how are you
going to place tiles down here, it turns out the only
way you can do it is to force a checkerboard
pattern each time you put a tile down is going to put a blue square somewhere we react to put an orange
square next to it. Even if you're rotated. A little more complicated
than that, the argument, but you would have to do
a checkerboard pattern. And if you look, you can see
from the checkerboard, well, the original one that had
these two squares had an equal number of blue
and orange, two squares. But this one remove
two orange squares. So there's more blue
squares than orange. But each time you put a tile down, you're covering one
blue and one orange. So there's no way to cover all
of these exactly with this tile. That doesn't work either. Okay, back to the computational
complexity theory. This problem is contained in NP. Why is that? Well, the question is, can RB tiled? So the witness is going to
be a tiling, in other words, a description of where each tile should go and
how it should be rotated, right, which can be checked in polynomial time that they don't overlap and that they
cover all of our. Here's a related question
that kind of highlights the importance of how
we represent integers. How about if we're given
a set of tile shapes and then a region specified implicitly, we're going to assume
it's a rectangle. And rather than
listing every point in the rectangle the way we
would for a general region. Instead, we'll just give two
integers, the width and the height. And we ask, given these
integers x and y, can an x by y rectangle be
tiled with non-overlapping and rotated copies of tiles and
D. So this contained in NP. And that's worth thinking about. Okay, so there's one model tiling. Now here's one that's a little
more standard Boolean circuits, but we're going to relate
them with a reduction. So first I want to
introduce Boolean circuits. Now we've talked about
Boolean formulas. These are a slightly
different concept. So formally, a Boolean circuit is
a DAG, directed acyclic graph. The sources, meaning
nodes with no edges coming into them, are called inputs. The sinks, meaning that the nodes are no edges coming out of
them are called outputs. This has two inputs, one output, and every other node
is called the gate. And each of those gates is
labeled with AND OR or NOT. So to contrast with
a formula, circuit, gates are allowed to have
unbounded, unbounded fan out. So this OR gate has two
edges coming out at one, go into this gate,
one go into this one. But formula, if you think of a
formula as being a surrogate, it's the kind of circuit
where the gates all have fanout one or put another way, you cannot reuse subexpressions
in a formula without rewriting. Another way to think
of it as a circuit is a general directed acyclic graph. Whereas the formula is a tree where the leaves
are labeled by inputs. Alternately, you can say
a formula is a DAG where fan-out greater than one
is only allowed by inputs. So you can either think
of it like inputs can appear more than once
on multiple leaves, or you can consider now there's
just one input for each variable, but it can go to multiple
gates with fan out, but that's the last
time you allow fan out. Okay? And then a circuit is satisfiable. If there is an input
making its output true.