So I've mention that not every problem we care
about is contained in NP. So it's worth cautioning
to this moment that there's some problems that are
sort of not obviously in NP. Maybe some of them are, but they're not obviously in NP. So here's one, no Hamiltonian path. Given a graph, we want
to answer the question, Is it not Hamiltonian? So if there is a Hamiltonian bad, there's a short proof of
that and it's the path. But it's not obvious
how to give a short, easily verifiable proof that every path in a graph
is not Hamiltonian. It seems to require
checking all of them. And it's worth cautioning
that not every problem that quote
looks like it's in NP. Surely it, just because
it has the word exists or find or something
in the statement, doesn't mean it's an NP. So here's a good example. Diao Fan tiny equation. So this is the problem given a
multivariable polynomial equation. So for example, something like this. So x squared minus three, y to the fourth plus
two at z equals 0. You want to answer the question, does it have an integer solution? So that sounds kind of
like an NP problem. It seems, oh, the short proof, if the answer is yes, be
the integer solution. Except why should it be short? Right? Maybe those integers
could be huge as a function of the description length
in bits of the equation. And in fact, it turns out that this
problem is not even decidable. So it's not just that the bound
on the witnesses is bigger, there is no bound on the witnesses. They can get arbitrarily big. And the obvious exhaustive search algorithm that requires
in this case that you search all possible triples of
integers you could assign to XYZ, it might have to keep
searching integers forever. Integers can get arbitrarily big before it finds one and
maybe there is no solution. Here's another one we
talked about already. Given a graph G and an integer K, does GE's largest
independent set has size exactly k. If we ask at least k, Then that's just the
independent set problem. And you can prove it by just
giving an independent set of size k that proves that the largest one
is either that size or bigger. But if you want to know, is there an independent set
of size this and no bigger, it doesn't seem obvious
how to prove there's not a bigger independent
set up in somewhere. It's a similar idea when you're
asking about small things, would be given a Boolean
circuit C, You want to know, is there a smaller circuit that
computes the same function, right? It might seem that circuit that
smaller would be the proof, except how would you quickly verify that they actually do
compute the same function? You apparently have to iterate over every possible input and that
would take exponential time, Does not a polynomial
time verification. Here's another one. It is
actually contained in NP, but I'm just pointing
out is not obvious. And it's given a set of
linear inequalities, do they have an integer solution? So it looks kinda like
diaphragm tiny equation above. Except that first of all, you're asking about
inequalities and second of all, it's not an arbitrary
polynomial, it's linear. So you don't get to multiply
two integers by Egypt. So this one seems to suffer
from the same problem. If there's an answer, it's not obvious that the
integers would be bounded in any way by the number of equations you have and
the number of variables. But it turns out they are bounded by an exponential in that number. And so the numbers are at most exponential in the
number of variables and equations than their size in bits is logarithmically
smaller than that. So it's at most
polynomial in the number. In other words, there's a
polynomial link witness. Once you have one of those,
you can quickly check. I just plugged them
into the inequalities, make sure they satisfied.