So now that we've seen many
examples of problems in NP, it's a good time to circle back and think about how
to formally define it with informally talked
about a problem is an NP. When there's proof, that's easy to verify whenever
there's a solution. So now let's formalize that. So ND is the class of problems. A number of problems here
means decision problems, which means languages are
subsets of their own star. So a problem is an NP. Whenever the following holds, that a string x is a yes instance
of a if and only if there is a W such that the pair X W is a yes instance of
a different language. We call a V the so-called
verification language. And what's AV? Well, hey, V is a decision
problem np regarding pairs XW, where we require that the length of w be bounded by a polynomial in x. So if a is a decision problem, right? And the, the above as the
textbooks, formalism, I liked it to be even slightly more formal with talking
about strings. Here. We say a is an entity
if and only if there is a decision problem AV
NP and a polynomial q. So that for all strings x, x is an a if and only if. The following holds. That there is a W of length
at most q of the length of x. So it could be longer than x, but at most polynomially long, such that the pair X
w is an AV, right? So if x is an a, there's a short proof
that's easy to verify, IE, the pairs and AV and Q
being short, or sorry, w being short means it's at
most q of the length of x. And conversely, if x is not an a, then there is no such WQ. No WWW give as a second input
would cause the algorithm, Brady to accept the terms. There's X is the instance
of the NP problem. W is the witness also known
as a proof or a certificate. And a B represents the decision problem that's
polynomial time solvable, the so-called verification
Brooklyn. Okay? So we define n to be the length of x. Well then n plus q of n is the
length of an instance for AV, because that's a pair x w. So that's a little bit longer
than n, but not too much. It's within a polynomial of n. So since Q is a polynomial, the running time of
the algorithm for AB, which is polynomial in n
plus q of n by definition. Well, that's also bounded
by a polynomial in n, Because n plus q of n is
bounded by a problem. Yeah. Okay, So with this formal
definition in mind, we're going to prove this
complexity class containment. Np is a subset of X. In other words, every problem in NP, though we think maybe not all
of them are contained in P. Well, they're all
decidable and in fact they're all decidable
in exponential time. So let's see why that is
for an input x of length n, the space of potential
witnesses is 0, 1 to the less than or
equal to q of n, right? So this is all the strings that
could possibly be witnesses. And that is about, and it's
theta of two to the queue event. So it's exponential
in N and no bigger. So for each problem a in NP, the following algorithm decides a, assuming that a has a verification
algorithm will call V sub a, That's about whose time is
bounded by a polynomial p. And this is just the algorithm that exhaustively searches
every possible witness. So an input x, you let
n be the length of x, and you iterate over every string
w of length at most q of n. And you simply run the
verification algorithm on x and w. And if that's true for any
of those, WE return true. If you get through the entire search without finding that
this ever returns true. And that's the part that
can take exponential time. You return false. So note that there's
going to be around two to the Q of n iterations
of this loop, right? And each iteration it's
going to take how long? Well, it's going to take p
of n plus the length of w, which is n plus q then which is
bounded by some other polynomial, some composition of p and q. So call that R of n. That's the polynomial
that bounds the, the, the running time of
each iteration of the loop. And that's done to, to
the queue of enzymes. So in other words, you
have total time is r times theta of two to the queue, then that's just two to the
something polynomial and n, which is exponential time. So we've shown a is an XP and it
was an arbitrary element of NP. So all event E is contained in X. Now, the conjecture is that you actually need in some
sense most of x to make this work. So imagine you wanted
to show that somehow. There's things in NP that
don't require that much time, maybe exponential, but
not huge exponentials. Well, the conjecture some
people believe is that no, you actually do need
exponential time. Or in other words, for some constant
alpha could be 0.1 point 0, 1 for some constant alpha. And t is not in time
of two to the Alpha. In other words, there's
some problem in NP. But the fastest
algorithm for it takes at least Time 2 to
the Alpha n or more. So that's unproven. In fact, showing that would be even stronger than showing
that P is not NP. This would be showing
that it not merely requires more than polynomial time, but in fact more than this
exponential amount of time. But as with most of the open questions and complexity
theory, we really don't know.