Okay, so we're going to go through some more
examples of reductions. And unlike the one we just did, which was between two problems, both involving boolean
formulas in general, the kinda more clever reductions or between two problems
of different types, like maybe one involves graphs
and the other involves formed. So we'll talk about abstractly right here about how to think
about doing these. And a typical reduction design will involve something
called gadgets. And these are substructures of the instance that the
reduction is constructed. And we'll get less abstract. I'll point out by example, what are the things they called
gadgets and the actual reductions. But There's two general
types, choice gadgets, and these give the freedom to choose particular parts of the NP witness. So in general, you're going to
have a reduction transforms an instance of one problem
into an instance of another. But it's generally the case that
as you look at the reduction, you could see how to
construct a witness for one problem out of a
witness for the other. And so the choice
gadgets are sort of how you get that transformation. And then the constraint
gadgets are there to impose constraints on the variables. To enforce that the
choices you're making up here are actually
legitimate that give you something correct for that particular problem
is it is quite abstract, but we'll get to concrete
examples in a bit. So first let's recall
the 3 coloring problem. But this is given a graph, an undirected graph G equals b, we want a three coloring
of the mean in a way to assign colors to nodes and v's that all nodes that are adjacent according
to e have different colors. Now we're going to show
three coloring is NP-hard. And by showing that any E3 SAT
is reducible to 3 coloring. And we already argued
three coloring is in NP. So this will show it's NP complete. Now, the colors are sort of symmetric here you can
just change the names of all the colors and it wouldn't
really affect whether it's a legitimate coloring
or you could permute them. So this is what makes NAD 3-sat useful because it treats
these two values, true and false symmetrically. Okay, So here's how we reduce an instance of any fees to
an instance of 3 coloring. So we have some Boolean formula. And imagine that it has
a clause that has x, y, and z appearing in it. So we're going to have
this choice gadget here corresponding to that clause. And the three colors
could be anything. But let's imagine that
we're going to interpret the color green to represent true and the color orange
to represent false. And then the third color will
just be neither. It'll be blue. So depending how these get colored in the final color and we're
going to interpret that as an assignment in the formula. So if you, so this is going to force because these two are
connected to each other, they have to be different. And because all of these
are connected up here, they all have to be different
than what this is, right? If this is blue,
these all have to be, one of the two halves is green
and the other is orange. Whichever one is green, will interpret that as the a site. So in this case, this would mean setting x to false and setting y to true
and setting z to true. And if you swap these around, this would be like setting x to
true and why to true and true. Okay? Now the constraint gadgets
or how we enforce that, the actual negations that appear in the various clauses somehow
constrain this things so that the only legitimate way to color this graph would look like an
NA ie satisfying assignment. So supposedly have a
clause x or y or z, right? So we know that we're going to
need some gadget here, right? And we don't know much about it yet. So let's just think through.
So we have to add something to this graph so that it's somehow
corresponds to this clause. So we can start with just
observing if this is x or y or z, like none of them are negated. While then maybe somehow the X, Y, and Z nodes up here ought
to be the things that are connected in here somehow, right? So this is me kinda walking through. How would I do a reduction? Well, maybe I'd start
with something like this and I wouldn't know
what should go here, but I know which node
should be connected. So the fact that X is
connected in here, and it's not the case that
this other node is connected. That's how the fact that
there's no negation on the X in this clause is showing up. Now this is always a sanity
check in your reduction. Make sure that somehow the specific structural constraints of the input, in this case it's the Boolean formula show up in the output, right? In other words, it
should be the case that if you changed the input formula, it would change which
graph you're getting here. So in other words, if we negated x, then there should be an
edge from NOT x down air and not an edge
from x down to here. So for example, if you had a
clause NOT x OR y OR NOT z, then this should be
how the connections. Okay, so here's how
we're gonna do it. Each of those gadgets is
just going to be a triangle. And this is going to be
enough to do the reduction. And we're going to have
essentially two nodes for each variable in
the whole formula. In this case there's three variables. And then we're going
to have three nodes in these constraint gadgets for each clause in the formula
connected in this way. So let's see how that
translates into. The formula is satisfiable if and only if the
graph is 3 colorable. So we know that up here, this is more or less the
only way to color the graph to color this thing some
color, we'll call it blue. And then to color these differently. So the only choice we have is
which one of these is going to be green and which one is going to be orange and same here and same here. But now we've further
constrain them down here. So suppose that we have
an assignment that NA ie satisfies the formula and that
assignment is 1, 1, 0, right? And you can check that
puts a 10 in this clause, and it also puts a
one on a 0 over here. So we're going to say, okay, that means that down here, the node corresponding
to that literal, we're going to want to color it the opposite of the
color up here, right? So in other words, if
green represents true, then we want to color
this variant of x green. And then the one anyons that it's connected to down here
should be orange. And similarly, because z
has been set to false, we look at wherever z is connected
and these gadgets down here, we set it to the opposite color. And then the third node here, we can just set to
the third color blue. So the idea is, in general, why did I pick x and z there? Well, notice that this
has at least one true, Let's say it's x and
at least one false, let's say at z and then
y, we're just ignore it. We just pick one true and one
false literal out of each clause. We set their colors down here to be the opposite of this
truth assignment up here, which makes them a legitimate
coloring because of this connection. And then we just set the third node representing the third
literal to be low. And then similarly over here, we identify at least one false. That's this x right here, it's false so we can set it to the opposite of false,
which is green. We identify at least one true. That can be why we set it to the opposite of the true
color, which is orange. And then the third one
we can set to blue. Okay? So suppose you instead. So that sort of shows
one direction that if the formulas and E satisfiable, then the graph is 3 colorable to how can we go the other direction? Well, now we'll show that if
the formula is not satisfiable, then there's no way
to color this graph. So again, we've
already argued this is more or less the only way
for the top part to look. Accept in each of these pairs, you're allowed to swap
where the two colors are. So now we're going to argue there's
no way to pick that swap ends. Air, you can legitimately
color it says suppose that, that no assignment
and E satisfies this. So you're forced to have
some clause with say, all true literals like 111
for XYZ will then, now, no matter what you do down here, each one of these is
connected to a green. And therefore there's no way to
put to color one of these great, but they're all
connected to each other. And you can't color just this
part with only orange and blue. This is no way to color the graph. So that shows both directions. Okay? So again, just a
reminder, reduction. Write the algorithm that
takes as input this formula down here and outputs this graph. It doesn't color the graph and
it doesn't satisfy the formula. It simply converts
formulas to graphs. Translating a question of satisfiability into
one of color ability. Now we then go and argue
about how we might satisfy or color in
one case or the other. But the algorithm itself is not
trying to solve that problem.