Okay, So here's yet another slightly different
way to characterize NP. This is the class of
Boolean property is, that's the textbooks term. I would rather use
the word predicate, but it just means a value
that can be true or false. The class of properties of
the form a of x, right? So on input x a of x
is a Boolean value. It's equal to the following. The value of there exists a W of the appropriate size such
that Av of x w is true, where AAV is itself a
property or a predicate in P and W is polynomial in x. So in other words, if g is a graph, say than H of G is the property that g is Hamiltonian will then AHV, the verification property of GP is the polynomial time
decidable property that P is a Hamiltonian path in G. This is just a slightly
different rephrasing of stuff we've said already. But this definition shows the
asymmetry between yes and no. So remember De Morgan's law. So the negation of an existence
statement is for all statement. So for example, we have this. The graph G is not Hamiltonian
if and only if not H of G once. That's just the definition of age. And that's, let's just substitute
this equivalence with HB. That's true if it's not
the case that there exists a path P that makes HV of GP true. And then use De Morgan's law to
pass this not through the exists. So it's not that there exists a path if and only if for all paths P, it's not the case that
AHV, the GP evil. In other words, for all paths B, p is not a Hamiltonian path in G. So the very sort of
drawn out way to just express the intuition
behind De Morgan's law. So in other words, NP is
defined by exist statements. But the negation of an egg exist
statement is a for all statement. So it's not necessarily
an NP property. So we can talk about a complexity class capturing
for all statements. And that's called co-NP. That's the for all version of NP. So this is the class of problems
whose compliments or an NP. Now be very careful
here we're not saying co-NP is the complement of NP. Np is a class of decision problems. They're all decidable. They all have some polynomial-time
algorithm defining them. The complement is every
single other language including a bunch of
undecidable problems. So go and he's not the compliment of, AND you gotta go one further
down into the set hierarchy. It's the set of languages, each of which is itself
a set of strings. And those sets each have a
complement sac that is in NP. So another way of stating
it does these are the problems for which the no
instances have a short proof. So these are properties
of the form a of x equals for all w b of x, w of wounds, where b is a
polynomial time problem. So what I caution CA and D is
not the compliment of entity. Okay? So here's an observation. If P equals NP, then NB equals co-NP. Why? You should pause to think
about that for a sec. Right? And the answer is that, well, COPI is just p, right? If, if a decision problem is NP, then so is its compliment. You can just take a regular algorithm for it and swap the
yes and no answers. And now you have an algorithm
for the compliment. So P were equal to NP, then they'd both be equal
to copy, which would be go. So here's an interesting question. If n equals co-NP, does that mean P equals NP? So it turns out we don't know, it's possible that np and go and
D could actually be the same. And yet neither is equal to p. We think that's
probably not the case, but it is an interesting question. So some problems are not obviously
in either envy or co-NP. And one example is this problem. Given a graph is it's
an a and a threshold k is its largest independent
set of size exactly k, right? There's no obvious proof
when the answer is yes, and there's also no obvious
proof for the answer's no.