So we've talked about CNF SAT. It has a special case called K sat, where k is a positive integer. And this is just a special case where each clause has exactly k literals. And so let's think about a few
special cases of the AS1 SAT. So I clam, one set
is NP. Why is that? Pause and figure that out. So once that just means it's
a conjunction of literals, ripe and a literal is a
variable or its negation. So if ever you get a variable and
its negation or to the literals, well, you can't
satisfy both of those. It would be unsatisfiable. But if, say, p weren't here and
you add q and r and not p. Well, if you only have a variable where
you only have its negation, that tells you what you ought to
set that variable to satisfy it. So it's very easy to just
determine if it's satisfied. Well, you just look, does it have
a variable and its negation? And if that's true, is not satisfied. All right, I'm going to claim that
2 SAT is also NP. Why is that? This is also worth thinking
about for a little bit. So pause. Okay, It's not quite as easy. So first let's observe that if
we have the formula a or B, that's equivalent to not a
implies B and not B implies a. That's actually looks like quite
a bit What's going on here? Well, just remember, an
implication is equivalent to the left side negated
or the right side. So not a implies b is just
equivalent to a or B, right? And notice that this formula, not a implies b is just the
contrapositive of this one, right? Not b implies a. So these two are actually
equivalent to each other. So taking an end doesn't
have any effect, but it's equivalent and they're
both equivalent to a or B. So here's what we're going to do. You want to know whether a
tooth to CNF formula Phi, such as this one over
here is satisfiable. You make a graph with one node
per possible literal, right? Pqr, and then their negations. And you draw an edge from
one node to another, corresponding to this up here, right? So each clause here is going
to contribute two edges. So this one, the first
edge it would contribute, would be you take the
negation of this, which is p. And that implies q. So there's a black arrow from p to q. And then going the
other way, You take the negation of the right one, NOT Q and draw an arrow to not P. So that's why we have
this other black arrow from NOT Q to not P. So you do
that with the other three clauses. You get six other edges
and it looks like this. So what are we gonna
do with this graph? So first observe this has
a satisfying assignment. If we set all of them to false, then this will be the
statement will be true. And something to notice
is that setting them to false corresponds to
this loop down here. Not p going to NADH
are going to not q. And if you follow these, you never visit backup here. So we're going to define
a contradictory loop. This graph G fee that
we derived from v to be a cycle containing both a
literal and its negation. In other words, at some point
you have the variable x. And then sometime later
this squiggly arrow represents that you've
maybe followed many edges. You can get to the negation of x, and then that's not quite
a contradiction yet, but from there you can get back to x. And if you look over here, you'll notice there's no
contradictory loop, right? Every cycle in here does not contain both a
variable and its negation. Now, if we were to add
an extra clause here, say and q or r, and it would add these
two green arrows that would introduce a
contradictory loop, right? So for one example, we
could see you could start at P and you could go to NOT Q. And then you could go to R, and then you could go back to P
and then to q and r and back to P. So you can have a cycle that
visits both Q and not Q. And the claim is going to be
that phi is satisfiable if and only if there are no
contradictory loops in g, right? And if you think about
what's going on here, what are these arrows saying? Well, this purple arrow
right here is saying, well, if P is Q, if P is
true, what do we know? Well, the purple arrow
says if P is true, then not q has to be true. In other words, q has to be false. And this black arrow right
here is saying, well, if not q is true, then not p has to be true. And that's not a contradiction yet. It might just mean q should be false. But then this is saying the blue
arrows I have not p is true, then not r has to be true. And then if that's true,
then q has to be true. If that's true, then
R has to be true. And if that's true, well
then p has to be true. But now we've said has to
be both true and false, which again, So a full proof
of that is in the textbook. We won't go through it,
but that's the idea. So this boils down to asking, are there any contradictory loops? And essentially that can be solved by just iterating over each variable and check whether it's possible to
reach from node x to node NOT x. And also is it possible
to reach from NOT x to x? And those are instances of the
graph reachability problem, which you can solve with a breadth-first search
or depth-first search, which can be done in
polynomial time and there's only a polynomial
number of variables. So graph reachability is NP. So that implies that
2 SAT is also in B. We can use a reachability
algorithm to solve 2-SAT. All right, the next integer
and interest is 3 SAT. So ones and twos that are both np. We're not going to argue
yet that 3 SAT is not NP. In fact, we don't know whether it is, but what we are going
to show is that despite there being more structured
than just CNF SAT, which allows very numbers
of literals in each clause. We're going to show
that this special case of CNF SAT called reset, is just as hard as CNF SAT. We're going to reduce
CNF SAT to 3 SAT. So how do we do that? Well, we're going to have
to write an algorithm that on input an
arbitrary CNF formula. Can convert any clause would say k elements into a number
of three clauses, meaning clauses with three girls. So let's start with the easy cases. You might have fewer than
three literals per clause. So suppose you have a clause x or y. What we can do is introduce a new variable that doesn't
already appear in our end, but let's call it z. And we'll replace the clause x
or y with these two clauses, x or y or z and x or y or Nazi. Now look at what this is doing. Whatever, suppose that the
input formula is satisfiable, then there's some way to
set x and y to satisfy. So if you just set them
to the same thing over here and just set z say to true, that would make this left clause be satisfied and also this right one, because x or y is satisfied, the fact that NOT z would
be false doesn't matter. And conversely, if this
is not satisfiable, so say if every assignment make some flaws like
say this one be false. What happens if this is false? Well, x and y both have to be false. So then look over here,
they're both false. So the only way that you
could possibly satisfy either clause would be to
satisfy the third letter O, but you can't satisfy both. They contradict each other. So we have one of these do clauses
are true, the other is false. So there would be no way to
satisfy this 3 CNF form. You can play a similar
trick with one clauses. If one of your clauses is simply x, you can now introduce two
new variables, Z1 and Z2. And now the four clauses you add iterate over every possible
value they can take. So if you just look at these, you'll see there's
no way to set z1 and z2 so that they are responsible for satisfying
all of these closets. At least like any
assignment to both of them, has to make both of these literals
false in one of these clauses, and then it's only x that's
leftover to satisfy it. So again, the truth of these
four clauses boils down to, does x satisfy this
original clause over it? So those are sort of the easy cases. Now, more difficult case
is if we have a clause with more than three variables flow. Again, this is easier by example, but it should be fairly obvious
how to generalize the example. Let's suppose we have a seven clause, a or B, or C, or D, or E, or F or G. So we're going to replace it
with these causes over here. We have a special start and end, the start one as the
first two, a and B. And then our first newly
introduced variable Z1, that's not in the original formula. And then the last one has
the last two, f and g. And this is only going to
apply it to clauses with four or more literals in them. So if you have more than
four now you're going to have some intermediate ones. And what do they look like? Well, each of them just has
one of the original variables, C and then D and then E. And then the newly introduced
variables sort of chained together. So whatever the last variable
was in the previous clause, its negation is the first one here. Then a new variable X2, and then its negation air, and so on and so forth. And so we won't go through
the case analysis. But you can do a similar
thing where you show if an assignment to a
through G satisfies this, then there's a way to set z1
through z4 to satisfy these. And conversely, if an assignment to a through G
does not satisfy these over here, then over on the right,
no matter how you set z one through z for this
is going to be false.