So let's think about this problem. Given a list of integers, this case 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, can we partition them into two
lists that have the same sum? So in this example you can, you can visualize it as putting balls on one
side of this or another. So you don't put the same color
on both sides and you can get 15 over here and 15 over here. And that corresponds to getting
a sum of 15 on each side. Now note that the total
sum has to be 30, right? Of each hat sums to 30
for each have some to 15, then the total has to be dirty. So this is a special case
of a more general problem, which is given a list of
integers and a target, some, it may not be half of
their total sum is just some other number
less than their total. Can we find a sublist
that sums to 90? So in this case we can five
plus six plus eight equals 19. So we formalize this as
two decision problems. One is called integer partitioning. We're given a list of positive
integers one through n k. We want to find a subset
a of the indices so that if you sum all the
integers in one subset, it equals the sum of all
those not in the subset. So subset sums that second
more generalized problem. For some reason this is always formalized as a set
rather than a list. A list can contain duplicates. A set cannot. So you're given that set of
integers and a target integer t. And the goal is to find a subset
of the integers that sums to t, where t may not be half of the total. Now I'm going to claim it's
obvious that integer partitioning is reducible to subset-sum,
right? Why is that? Well, as I said, integer partitioning is a
special case of subset sum, where you set the target to half of the total setup and you can easily figure out what the total silicons. So let's think about this from the perspective of what the
3 SAT problem was doing. The goal there was to figure out a satisfying assignment or
report that none exists. So each clause is a constraint. You want to find one assignment that satisfies all the constraints. And each constraint has
only three variables. There's just, you know, each
clause was pretty small, but there's many constraints. Whereas each of these
correspond to satisfying one single constraint that the
sum is what you want it to be. But that's some involves all
of the variables potentially. Okay, so before we talk about
how hard this problem is, let's see, is it easy? Let's explore some obvious kind of algorithmic attempt to solve it. So you might think at first that
a greedy algorithm would work. We could say, well, I want
to partition the numbers. I'll call it Xs here
into a left and a right, whose sums are equal. So we could start with
both lists empty. And we could try going through
the x's in sorted order and say, Okay, well, I've got some, some in the left half and
some some in the right f. If the sum in the
left half is smaller, well maybe the next
variable X should go there. Otherwise it goes into the right. But this doesn't work. For example, if you process
the list 45678 in order, it gives you left is 468
and right is 57, right? And that sums to 12, which
has not happened, 30. Okay, so what's the next tool in
our algorithmic tool, the egg? We could try dynamic programming and it actually turns out this works. And if you seen a bit ahead, you know this problem is NP-complete. So we'll talk about
how we get to have a polynomial time algorithm
for an NP-complete problem. After we explore how
this algorithm works. Okay, so we're going to define this predicate here that takes two
inputs are both integers. J is an index, so it's going to be one of the
subscripts on one of our numbers. And t is a target cell. And we're going to say f of
JT is true if we can balance a weight of T using only
weights X1 through Xn. Or in other words, if there
is a subset of the integers, of the, of the first j are
integers that sums to t, right? So this is like a
restricted version of the problem where you're only allowed to use the first
J integers in the list. And to solve subset sum, you want to calculate f of KT, where K is the final index. So let's think about how we would figure out the value of
the predicate recursively. Well, we can either use the number
x-j in the subset a or not. So we have this recursion. Maybe we don't bother to include XJ. And if it's possible to find
numbers from x one to x j minus 1, that sum to t, then
this would be true. F of j minus 1 t would be true. And therefore it would
also be possible to do that if we had XJ around, we just wouldn't
include it in the set. So in that case, f of
JT will also be true. But the other way for F OJT to be true is that we do
in fact include X. And so we also want to ask, okay, supposedly did include xj. What would the other numbers
that we include have to sum to? Well, Xj is responsible
for part of the sum. So t minus x j as the
rest of the cell. In other words, it's also possible
we could use the first j minus 1 integers to get to t minus x j
and then include XJ and get it. So that's our recursion. Now the base case is when j is 0. In other words, we're
asking what if we are not allowed to include any
of the numbers at all? Then when can we sum to t? Well, that's only true when t is 0, write the empty sum to 0. But any other target can't
be reached with no integers. So based on this base
case and this recursion, we can fill out a dynamic
programming table for all the values of t
and j that are relevant. So the first row is going
to be the base case. It's true for t equals 0
and false everywhere else. And then now we can trace through a couple examples of
using this recursion. So first of all, the whole left column
is going to be true. That corresponds to looking
at j minus one, right? So that will always be
true that we can simply include none of the integers
and get a sum of 0. But then sometimes we want
to include an x side. So in this case, if we include x1, which is equal to 2, right? We can work out from the, the j minus one case, in this case that J1 and
t equals two is true. And similarly we can fill
in the rest of the table. We're always going to have up arrows. And then the kind of slope of
these other arrows depends on the, the number x-j that
you're referring to. Okay, so there's a dynamic programming
algorithm. What's the running? Well, if w is the sum of all
the numbers and the whole list, then the running time is going
to be o w times k, right? We're iterating over. The biggest way to could possibly be, which would be the sum of
all the numbers, right? N, We're also iterating
over all k of the numbers, doing a constant time
operation for each one. Okay, so how fast is this as a
function of our input silence? All remember, the
size of an integer in binary is logarithmically smaller
than the integer itself, right? So this is polynomial in
the numbers themselves. If we gave our inputs and urinary, this would be a polynomial
time algorithm. But generally we don't, generally we're giving
an integers in binary. And so this is an
exponential time algorithm. If you write down the actual number
of bits that each x i needs, you're going to need
O of two to the b, if b is the number of beds and
then times the number of integers. So it is in fact an
exponential time algorithm. But if you want to solve this for
cases where maybe K is very big, but the individual
integers aren't very big. It would actually be inefficient. Algorithm is just exponential
in the number of bits you.