Okay, So we've talked a
lot about the class NP, and now we're going to get to the main reason people
care about that class, which is this notion
of NP-completeness. So we say a problem is NP-hard if every problem a in NP is
reducible to that problem be. So we've talked about
particular instances of NP problems that are
reducible to each other. But this is saying a
much stronger thing that every single problem in NP is
reducible to this one problem. So in other words, it's at least
as hard as any problem in NP. Now technically this applies only to what are so-called
many one reductions. We've been a little loose with the concept of what
exactly is a reduction. So far I've just said, Oh, reduction is a way to use an
algorithm for one problem B, and then use it to
solve another problem. And we would want that if the
first algorithms polynomial time, the whole thing, it's
polynomial time. But many one reduction is a very
special type of reduction where the way you use the algorithm for B is you take your instance of a, you transform it into
an instance of B. You hand off that instance to an algorithm for B and
then whatever yes, no answer, it gives, you report the exact same answer. So it's like a tail call right
at the end of the reduction. So typically when we talk
about such reductions, we don't bother including
the part at the end where we call B because
it always looks the same. But the last step is always hand off the output to be and
report whatever it does. So the reduction itself is just the function that
does the composition. So it's a polynomial-time
computable function that takes as input a string, which is an instance of a, and, and outputs another string
which is an instance of B. For all x. That could be input x is an a
if and only if f of x is in B. So when we're talking about
reductions for NP completeness, this is always going to be the kind of reduction that we talked about. And we say that B is
NP complete if it's NP-Hard and also it's
contained in NP, you can have NP-Hard
problems that are not in NP and the halting problem is one, not even decidable, but it
turns out it's NP-Hard. But we're, in this chapter
are going to focus on only problems in NP. So the first theorem we'll discuss is something that's
actually not that obvious, but it's just that there
is an NP complete problem. So this is maybe not obvious. You know, we, we've shown how certain problems can
be reduced to others. But there's nothing that seems to
be intrinsic about the class NP that would somehow make you think every single problem and it is
reducible to one single problem. But it is, and in fact, it's, once we write it down and
then kind of seems obvious. So we're basically going to define a fairly artificial looking problem. It's not like a natural problem
would necessarily want to solve. And it's whole point is just to
be designed to be NP-Complete. So we call it Witness existence. And this is the problem given a
program P that takes two inputs. Called x and w. So this is going to be a verification
program like the kind of program that runs in polynomial time that lets you see that a
certain language is in NP. So we're given just that
program and then I'm writing the two inputs
it would take here. Those aren't both part of
the input to this problem. Does the program is and the first
input x and then a third input. And you can think of this
as like a time-bound. So the way I'm going to express it is it's an integer t in urinary. And I said most of
the time we want to do integers in binary
because it's more efficient. But here we want to use this to sort of clock how many steps we're
going to be willing to run p4. And so we want that to scale
linearly with the size of our input. And so if we write
down T 1s in a row, we're going to have a
one in the string for every time step we
allow Peter and Paul. So the question we're going to
ask about these three inputs, p, x, and t, is the following. Is there a w, a second input to
be whose length is at most t, such that P of x w outputs yes, in at most t steps. Or in other words, we're
basically asking if this thing is an NP verifier, and then x is an instance
of the NB language, and then T is an amount of
time we're willing to wait. We're just asking is there a witness that would cause the verifier to say yes
within this amount of time. So let's think for a second
and pause right here. What's the reduction from
Hamiltonian path to witness it? As we said, everything in NP reduces to this,
including this language. So let's think about that. So it would be more or less
the same for any NP problem. The on input graph
G, you want to know, is there a Hamiltonian path in G, the p and the x and the t would
give to witness existence. The p would be just to the
verifier for Hamiltonian path, it would be the same no
matter what the graph is. The x would be the graph as
the input to Hamiltonian path. And the integer t would be the
running time you would expect the verifier to take on that graph if you gave
it a Hamiltonian path. So it wouldn't be that long, they'd be close to linear, not much more than linear
time in the length of x. So it might be something
like length of x times a big constant or length of x
squared has to be on the safe side. Okay? And this is where thing and I
do y is t expressed in urinary. So think about this on your own. This is a very, this tends
to confuse students a lot. So we can talk about this
more when we discuss. But if you didn't
express teen urinary, if I had written down this problem, this would've been a legit problem to define if I said write
down T in binary, but then it turns out this
would not be NP-complete. This would actually be an n. Complete problem. So it is crucial that we
represented in urinary here. Okay, so here's the only reason that anybody cares about the class NP. And it's the following statement that if there is an
NP-complete problem in P, then in fact, every problem in NP is also in P. In other
words, P equals NP. So we don't actually think either
of these statements is true. The conjecture is
that there will fall. So the contrapositive statement, it's kinda more informative about what we think the
state of the world is. Which is that if P is not NP, which we think is probably true, no NP-complete problem is NP. In other words, showing
that our problem is NP complete amounts to show and
that is not contained in B. So we have the following
two scenarios. And these are the only
two possibilities. Either NP is different
from p and then all the NP complete problems are different from
all the P problems, or all three of them are equal. P is equal to np. And then by the technical definition, every problem in NP is NP-complete. So if we take P not equal to NP as a scientific hypothesis that we
don't know how to prove yet, but we have a lot of evidence for if a problem is
shown to be NP-complete, this is evidence that it
is intractable, right? Remember we said P may not
capture all the problems. That p may not be a
good representation of problems that are efficiently solvable because some of
them take time n to the 100. But we did argue that
if a problem is not NP, then it's most likely just not
efficiently solvable period. Okay? So we're going to have to think a lot about
these reductions here. Now remember, reductions
are transitive, right? So if a is reducible to B
and B is reducible to see, this implies that a
is reducible to see. So why is that? Well, a reduction
transforms an instance of a to b with the same answer, right? And the reduction from
B to C transforms a B instance to a Z instance
with the same answer. So you can simply compose them. Give the instance of a
to the first reduction, give the output of that
to the second reduction. And you've got hip hop, a polynomial time
reduction from a to C. So here's why that's important. If B is NP complete. In other words, all a in
NP are reducible to be. And if we can somehow show that
B is reducible to see this term, this will show that C
is NP-Complete as well, assuming that C is also contain B. So the picture looks
something like this. You have your NP-Complete problems, which are somehow the
hardest problems in NP. And you've gotta be that you
somehow know is NP-Complete. Suppose you have one
of these on hand. That means that everything
in NP is reducible to it. So suppose you can show
that B is reducible to see, we'll then by transitivity
through all of these, all of these problems must
be reducible to see as well. So if also you can show
that C is contained in NP, it's not up here somewhere. Then you've shown everything
in NP is reducible to see. So it is envy them. So
to show an ND problem, if you know it's an ERA, usually that part is easier. But to show that it's
also NP-Hard, right? Reduce some NP-complete
problem B to it. Do not go the other way. Do not reduce C to B. In other words, you're always
taking something you know, is NP-complete and you're reducing it to the unknown one you're trying
to prove, not the other way. It's very common to
switch those two around. So in other words, you show how
to transform an instance of a known hard problem into an
instance of the new problem. So the new problem is sort of
the output end of the reduction. Now, we're going to cover Sections 52 and 53 in the
textbook next in reverse order. 52 gives the first sort of
natural NP-complete problems. We gave an unnatural one
of the witness existence, but we're going to use that eventually to show that
these two natural problems, 3 SAT we talked about
already and a new one called circuit SAT
are also NP-complete. And then 53 will go
through a bunch of NP hardness reductions as well as general design
principles for them. And I find it easier to go
through Section five 31st. So to do that, we're first
going to have to assume that circuit SAT and 3-sat
are both NP-Complete. We're not going to prove it to. We go back to Section 52.