So we'll do another
example of a reduction. Now this one is going to be
between two problems are the same type of object that
both questions about graphs, but they're much different
questions about graphs. 3 coloring is just asking, can you color a graph with three colors so that no two
adjacent nodes have the same one. An independent set is an
optimization problem, which phrased as a
decision problem says, given a graph and an integer K, can you find an independent set, meaning a set of nodes and no edges between any of them
of size at least k. So in this case, the choice gadgets that let
us translate the witness, the coloring from one
problem to the witness. The independent set and the other
are going to look like this. So we're going to have in, we're going to take a graph as input. We're going to produce
a graph as output. That graph we output
will be a collection of these gadgets connected in a way
I will see you on the next slide. But each of these collections
will be complete. So that will enforce that if any of the nodes
in the independent set, none of the other ones can be
because they're all connected. So if there are k complete subgraphs, any independent set with
k nodes must choose exactly one node per
complete subgraph. Because the only way to get
decay is to use all of them. So adjacent some graphs
are going to have different relative
nodes that have to be picked because we'll
hook them up like this. So the top one here is
connected to the top one there. I've drawn the edge, it's
kind of a dotted line, but it's just a regular edge, just like bees, It's just showing
it has a different purpose. Now the bottom one
connects to the bottom. So this would not be
an independent set. You would be forced to pick two different nodes in relative
positions in each of these. So the idea is going to be let, to let the relative
choice of the node within the complete subgraph be
a color of that subgraph. Now, the subgraphs we need are
just these triangles, right? So on input a graph, we want to know can it be
three colored? Here's one. We're going to output a graph that
has three times as many nodes. Because for each node
here we're going to have this triangle over here. And we're going to connect
the triangles in this way. The top of each will be
connected to the top of adjacent ones according
to the original edges. And we're going to
interpret how we assign an independent set or a
coloring in this way. So we have to show that by
doing this transformation, this graph is 3
colorable if and only if this has an independent
set of size k, where k is the number of nodes in the original graph or the
number of triangles over here. So if we colored this node blue, that would mean we
should pick this node to be in the independent set over here. If we colored these two nodes orange, we should pick these two nodes
to be in the independent set. And finally, these two are green than these two nodes should
be an independent set. And you can see that because
between pairs of adjacent clusters, it's always a different
relative position. The Gothic, this is indeed
an independent set. There are no edges between any
of these five black notes here. Conversely, if you have an independent set in
this graph of size k, where k is the number of clusters. The only way to do that. And you, since you can pick
at most one per cluster, is to pick exactly
one in each cluster. And they've gotta be in
different relative positions. So if you translate
backwards through this, you get a coloring of
the original graph.