Now we saw that three
coloring is reducible to planar 3 color and meaning an
algorithm for planar 3 color in, even though it only
works on planar graphs, can be used after but a processing to determine the 3
coloring of any graph. And that's maybe not so surprising because they're both
questions about graphs. Digital transformation to turn a possibly non planar graph into a planer one
with the same answer. But what we're going to
show now is something a bit surprising that 3 coloring
is reducible to CNF SAT. Write a question about a totally
different type of object. So we're going to show how
if we had an algorithm that can determine whether an
arbitrary CNF formula is satisfiable or not. We could use that to
determine whether a given graph is 3 colorable or not. And the way we're going
to do it is by giving them an algorithm that
on input a graph g will output a CNF formula fee that is satisfiable if and only if the
input graph is 3 colorable. And so if we had an
algorithm that could determine satisfiability
of CNF formulas. Together with this
algorithm we're about to describe is called the reduction. We can use it to get the answer
about whether G is 3 colorable. And then we'd have an
algorithm for three color. So the key idea here is going
to be for each node in V, we're going to make
up three variables. You are UG and UB. And exactly one of them
will be set to true. So for example, coloring you
read will correspond to you. R is one and the other two are 0. Now we're going to have to enforce that by how we design the formula. So here's what we'll do
for each edge uv any. Now this is a good sanity check
when you're doing a reduction, make sure that your reduction
actually depends on the whole input. So in this case, what I've
said so far is we'll do this. And I didn't mention E at all. I just talked about the nodes. So make sure that somewhere in the reduction you actually use
the full structure of the graph. So here's where the structure
of the graph influences us. If we have an edge u, v, and e, We add clauses to capture the implication that if
you as a certain color, that implies v is
not that same color. So we have these three implications. View is red, it's not
the case that v is red. And if you as green, if not the case that v is gray. And similarly for blue, and remember that p implies q
is equivalent to not p or q. So we can replace these implications
with ors and look at that. They look like closets. So we have an end of
ores of literals. Now, if we stopped right
there, this wouldn't work. A formula that has nothing but clauses like this is easy to satisfy. You just make everything
falls, right? But we're not, we want to capture the fact that you need to
assign an actual coloring. And coloring corresponds to setting one of these to true and
the other two to false. So we're going to
also add clause like this for each node that
it's the case that you are, or UAG or UGA has gotta be set
to true at least one of them. So we're almost there. This ensures we can't just
make everything falls, but this allows us technically
to make something that's not a coloring because it allows us to make more than
one of these is true. So finally, we have to
add some constraints that no more than one of these three
variables can be set to true. And to do that, we can
just add these clauses. And if you go through
the logic of this, you see that they will
ensure that exactly one together with this
constraint over here, exactly one of each of these constraints is
going to be set to true.