But we're going to start with
a high level level overview of this class, NP. We've been doing a lot
of high-level overviews. We're going to get
detailed after this. But Let's remind ourselves about this decision problem
called Hamiltonian path, which is the problem given as input, an undirected graph G. Does
G have a Hamiltonian path, meaning doesn't have a path that
visits every node exactly once. Now, it's often said it's hard
to find a needle in a haystack, and we can use that metaphor here. The needle research 84 is the
Hamiltonian path if that exists, and the haystack is somehow the set of all
paths. So we might consider. Now there's an obvious algorithm
to solve this problem. You just look at all possible
paths in the graph and check whether each one
is Hamiltonian or not. But that takes a long time. So we did see that it's possible to quickly check whether a given
path is Hamiltonian or not. And that somehow captures the
essence of this class NP. And formally, we'll define a
decision problem to be an empty if, whenever the answer
for an instances yes, like for Hamiltonian path, the instance would be a graph
that has a Hamiltonian path. There's a simple proof of this fact. In the case of this problem, the simple proof is the path itself. Now in general, what we mean by simple proof is that given the proof, it's checkable in polynomial time. There's an algorithm that
can look at the input, the graph, and the proof, the path and tell whether that path is a Hamiltonian
path in that graph. Note the asymmetry of this definition that talks
about yes instances. It's not necessarily
the case that there's a simple proof in the
case of The answer is no. And think about that
for Hamiltonian path. If I try to prove to you, here's a graph and I claim
it has no Hamiltonian path. How would I prove that? What short string, good, I give to you that once
you've checked it, you would believe there's no path visiting each node exactly
once. Not obvious. Okay, so before we
formally define and B, let's think a bit about
this distinction between P, the problems where I can give a yes or no answer in polynomial
time versus NP, where I can't necessarily do that. But if somebody gives me a potential solution that they
claim means the answer is yes, that can be checked
in polynomial time. So suppose that I
know a problem is NP, it has a polynomial time algorithm. Is there also in NP was worth
thinking about for a second, pause if you want to. So what would be the easily
verifiable proof in that case? Well, it would simply be
the algorithm itself. You have a polynomial time
algorithm that can tell whether a is or whether an instance
is in the language a or not. So if I claim the answer is yes, I can simply give a transcript
of the computation of that algorithm on the input
and you could run it yourself. You could just go
through and verify yep, each step is the next
step you would get by running the algorithm and
then verify that at the end, the algorithm actually says yes. Okay? So that means every problem that's contained in B is
also contained in NP. Or the set theoretic way
of expressing that is, P is a subset of NP to all the problems that
can be solved quickly, can be checked quickly. Checking is like an easier thing to do because you get this
extra information, right, the potential answer. So the P equals NP question is about whether that inclusion
is proper, right? Is NP contained in B? In other words, are they equal? Or is there a decision
problem in NP, but not NP? And this is my notation for
set difference here, right? So if np set minus p
has something in it, that's a problem where
you can check solutions efficiently but you can't find
them were given no solution. So every problem in
NP can be solved by a slow algorithm that exhaustively searches all
of the possible proofs. Part of the definition of NP is that the proofs have a certain
bound on their length, so there's only a
finite number of them. But p is this very special
subset of NP for which some mathematical insight lets us avoid that exhaustive search, right? And just beeline
straight to the answer. And Chapter 3 or any
class and algorithms like 122 or 220 do is entirely
about such insights. That's what an
algorithm's biases about. So the P versus NP question, essentially at an intuitive
level, ask the question, is find me needles harder than
distinguishing them from Hey, write the distinguishing Airbnb like the proof checker and
the definition of NP.