So we've talked about
how we're going to study the time complexity of problems. And we're going to focus a lot
on polynomial running time. It's natural to ask why. Well, let's try to
motivate it in this way. Here's an algorithm for
finding out whether a graph G has an Eulerian path
or not based on the shortcut, characterized by the number of nodes. So you just loop over every
node in G and you ask, is it's degree odd or not? And if more than two
nodes have odd degree, it cannot have an Eulerian path. So what's the running
time of this algorithm? Well, the easy part is that the loop executes n times n
nodes in the graph. Okay, That's easy. The hard part is, well,
how long it'll take, and it depends on the time complexity of evaluating this statement
right here, right? So this if check right here is essentially calling a
subroutine degree of the node. How do you figure out
the degree of the node? Well, now it kind of depends
on your representation. Do you have an adjacency matrix? And then it would be
linear time because you'd have to go over an entire row, that adjacency matrix of
length n to count the degree. It could be more if the matrix
lookups are not even constant Time. If you have an adjacency list, it could be constant
time because you can maybe store the number of neighbors. So this could make a difference. So we're not going to
dig too much into this. I just want to point out, you can make what appear to be
minor differences in modeling choices and have an effect the exact running time
of your outer butt. These choices generally
are going to affect the running time measurements by
no more than a polynomial factor, like most of these kinds
of choices you could make, or just a linear
factor, they might add, you know, a multiplicative factor n, But they tend not to do
much more than that. But even more extreme choices often
have a polynomial difference. Maybe your algorithm runs and squared slower than it would have
under some different choices. Okay? So one lesson to draw from that is 0. If you're really trying to
get the best algorithm, you should be careful in
how you make these choices. But another lesson
we're going to draw to motivate computational
complexity theory is that if our goal is to understand the fundamental properties of
computation and not artifacts, that particular modeling choices. Then we should consider equivalences and running time up to
a polynomial factor. If we want to say that what
we're going to discover is true about all computation than we had better not make these fine-grain
differences otherwise that would be true in some
models and not others. So you often hear this quote
attributed to Dykstra. I don't think he actually
said it, but it's that computer science is no more about computers than
astronomy is about telescopes. And I don't totally agree with that in a lot of it is about computers, but I think what
they're trying to get at there is when we're doing
the theory of computation, we're not really studying the
exact computer you have in hand. We're trying to figure out what is true of any computer you could build, either the ones you are now, the ones you own yesterday are
the ones that might be invented. All right, so I kinda
like this quote from the textbook a little better. Which is rather than
studying the guard grinding lenses and mirrors, let us now turn our
attention to the stars. Okay, so we're going to encounter our first so-called
complexity classes. And these are going to be
sets of decision problems. Rights of the textbook
just says this. It says P is the class of problems
solvable in polynomial time. Okay? So that's a little and precise. I do like to be a little more precise than the
textbook. Some takeaways. So first I want to acknowledge that the way most people
talk about the class P, they consider to be a set
of decision problems. And there's lots of
interesting things you can do in polynomial time, like multiply integers, but
those aren't decision problem, so we don't technically
say they're NP. So the way we tend to formalize decision problems is they're
subsets of 01 star two. We say one such subset, which is a language or decision
problem, is contained in P. If there's a program
Q and a constant c. So that for all possible
binary strings x, when you run q on input x, it halts in at most length
of x to the c steps. That's the polynomial-time part. And q of x outputs one if
and only if x is an a, that's the correctness part. That q here is actually
deciding the language. Okay, our next complexity class
gets a little more fine grained. Instead of just saying you have
a polynomial running time, it talks about closer to
an exact reading time. So if you have a function
T that the time-bound and takes as input a
length of a string and it outputs the worst-case
running time on any string of that length than time of T of n as the class of problems
solvable in time. Big-o of TEA that, alright, so here we're using the
kind of non sharp version where the time doesn't need to
be exactly t of n or smaller, it could be 3 times T of
n or 10 times d of them. Okay, So with this
complexity class in mind, or rather this infinite
family of classes, we can express P as
being the union over all constants C of time
of n to the c, right? So these are all the possible
polynomial time bounds. And n squared, n cubed, n to the fourth and so on. And when we write Pali of n, This is often shorthand
for Big O of n to the c, for some constant c, right? So this is generally what
do we want to be lazy and we don't want to work out
exactly what the constant is, but we want to say, okay, if you did a little more work, it figure out the constant. Maybe it's seven, and
we would have just proven it's O of n to
the seventh, right? So under this sort of
more loose notation, we can say P is time
of poly of n, right? All right, and then the last
complexity class here is x. This is exponential running times are rather that the problems
decidable in exponential time. So this is time of two to the
poly-A than or more precisely, the union over all
possible constants C of the problems decidable in
time two to the n, to the c. Okay? So those times are bigger than
polynomial running times. They're actually strictly bigger. But for now we won't
worry about that. We'll just observe that for every
possible constancy, a hundred, ten hundred million n to the c is big O of 2 to the n.
It's actually little, it's also a little low,
but all we need here is that two to the n grows at least
as fast as any polynomial. And so, just to restate that
in set theoretic language, it means the set P, the set of decision problems
solvable in polynomial time, is a subset of EXP, those that are solvable
in exponential time.