So to wrap up this section, we want to talk about
asymptotic notation, which is how we sort of
simplify our method of counting the number of steps
that an algorithm would take. We're not really going to write down the exact number of steps
that an algorithm would take on an input of size n.
And we're going to write something kinda close to it and
much simpler to write down. And for this we'll
use big O notation. So if we write that a function T of n equals big O
of a function f of n. What does it mean? Well, intuitively, it
means that the function t is less than or equal
to the function, right? I put it in scare quotes because functions take
many different values. T could be bigger than f on some values and smaller
than on others, or which one would be bigger, right? This gives us a way
to compare them and say one is roughly
less than or equal to. So if we were to be more proper, we would just write t equals o of f n here is not a variable that
actually comes into it. We're just comparing the
function t with the function f. But often we write 0 of
f of n to sort of remind ourselves that this
is a function taking as input a single number
that we call Han. That's the size of our
input to the algorithm. So and to be even more proper, well, the equals is sort
of misleading here. We're not saying that o of f is a function and it's
the same function as t. Technically, if we wanted
to formalize this, we'd say O of F is
a set of functions. The set of all functions
that are upper bounds for t and t are that are upper bounds for F and T is contained in that set. So this would be sort of more proper, but we don't write that and
nobody else writes that. They write T of n equals o, right? Okay, So if intuitively this means
t is less than or equal to f, Well, we'd like to have a
notation for strictly less than, and that's what we
use little low for. So if I write T is big O of f, it means F grows at
least as fast as T0. This means f grows
strictly faster than t. Formally, we would
say that the limit as t goes to infinity of T of
n over f of n goes to 0. This is how we can formalize that. And we can say that T is big O of f if and only if f is not
little o of t, right? Which is somehow obvious if
you use this analogy, equals, because t is less than
or equal to f if and only if it is not the case that
f is strictly less than d. So here are some examples of functions that are big
O of other functions. So three n squared is big O of n
squared, right? Three and square. It is technically bigger, but only by this constant factor. So we can say it's big
O of n squared there. Asymptotic growth rates are the same. N squared is big O
of three n squared. Obviously because three n squared grows even faster than n squared, a 100 n-squared is actually
little low end of that 2.1. In other words, no matter how big a constant you have out in front, it can't compare to having
a bigger exponent, right? So any bigger exponent
than two above, and that's going to grow
faster than n squared. So similarly, end of the
2.1 is little o of n cubed. And finally, this is a rule or memorizing any polynomial
function of n, including with a huge
exponent like n to the 100, that's a little low of any
exponential function of n, such as two to the n and 2 to
the n is little-o of 2 to the 3. Be careful here. The,
these look like they're within a constant
because of that three. But that constants
up in the exponent. It's not being multiplied
by the whole function. It has been multiplied
in the exponent. And so another way of
saying that is that two to the three N is 2 to the n, and then that whole thing, Q, right? So if you take any
function and cubit, the cubed function
grows strictly larger. Okay? So formally we can say T is big O of f if and only
if there's a constant c. So that for all n, T of
n is at most c times f. This is one way to
formalize the definition. And we also have a
notation for equals. And again, this doesn't mean equals. It means like equivalent. Things can be equivalent
but they're not the same. So we say T is big theta of f if and only if,
well, think about it. If you had a way to
define less than or equal and greater than or equal, how could you use that
to define equals u? Well, you would say
it goes both ways. We say T is big theta of f, of t is big O of f, and f is big O of d. So this means they
grow at the same rate, so they're roughly equal. And we also have this notation
for the other direction of these, we say T is big Omega of f if
and only if f is big O of t. Intuitively, t is greater
than or equal to f, and little Omega means
strictly greater. Essentially, we say
T is little Omega of f if and only if f is little o of t. Just swapping them are. Now, here's an exercise
to see if you're following what's happening here. If we say f of n is big O of log
N. Normally when I say log of n, I'll main log base two
of n. But here I'm going to claim actually that
could be some other base. It could be log base e, then that could be log base ten of n. And I don't think we need to bother writing the
base of the logarithm. Why is that? Why is it that f of n
would be big O of any of those logs no matter what the
bases. So think about that.