So we're going to discuss a bit, a conceptual theme that sets sort of theoretical
computer science apart. And it's this notion of
complexity and where it lives and the distinction between a problem and an algorithm
for the problem. So let's consider the
algorithm that we all learned in grade school to
multiply numbers together. So if you have two n digit numbers and here will be the
size of our input. The grade school algorithm says that for each digit
in the bottom number, why you're going to make a row? And each of those rows all have about the number of digits of the top. So you're going to have
n rows of the n digits, each that size n squared. And making each of the digits is a constant time operation that's just adding together
a couple of digits. So the total time to do
this is o of n squared. Now, it might seem like
that's optimal, right? You might have learned this in grade school and blah,
blah, blah, yeah, that's obviously the only way to
multiply integers, but it isn't. So here's a better
algorithm from the sixties. And the idea is it uses
a clever recursion. You take x and y, can you split them up into
two equal size pieces. Size here, meaning the length
in bits or hi In digits. So if X here is about 1 trillion, you split it into two
sequences of digits and you get a is about 12 thousand, b is about 67 thousand, and similarly is split up y and a, C and D in this way. Okay? So if we want
to look at how do we express what x and y r as a function
of these two smaller numbers? Well, you just take
a and you left shift it by n over 2 and
add it to be right. And what is left shift
in, in base ten? That means multiplying by 10 for each digit you want
to shift to the left. So x is 10 to the n over
2 times a plus b y. Similarly for C and D. So x times y is then this expression, that's x times this expression. That's why. And if you multiply
that out first, outer, inner last, you get this
expression for x times y. So it looks like what we've said is that while to
figure out x and y, you have to do four
multiplications to get AC, AD, BC, and BD. And if you crank through, how much time would it take to do four multiplications on numbers
that are N over two digits each. It wouldn't really say
at anytime that would still be n squared total. But we can notice, well, if you had a plus B times C plus D, this other number that hasn't
shown up yet, if you had that. And multiply that out and then
subtract off two of the terms, AC and BD, which we're already
going to need to calculate here. You get the other two
numbers added together, AD plus BC, right? So in other words, by doing only three multiplications, AC and BD, and then a
plus b times c plus d. And each of those are an
n over two digit numbers, along with a constant number of additions and
subtractions to get them. And a couple of shifts, which are a lot faster. Those take only linear time to
do the additions and the ships. You get it right, so we can
save one multiplication. We cut from four down to three. So if you work through the
time complexity of this, well, it's a constant number
of linear time operations, which is O of n times three
multiplications on N over two digits, digit numbers, which recursively
we can express as T of n over 2. T of n is the total time. And if you solve that recurrence, you get that this is instead
of being o of n squared, it's O of n to the log base 2 of 3, and that's smaller than
2, it's about 1.6. So in other words, we get an asymptotically better
algorithm with this recursion. Now, this isn't the best
possible thing to do. It's been known for a
long time that using something called the
fast Fourier transform, this can be done in time
n log square root 2. Then very recently, this was about
a year ago, it was discovered. There's an algorithm that can take
time o of n log n. The obvious lower bound is omega of
n because you have to read all the digits and it's
actually an open question. Is there a linear time
algorithm for multiplication? This is not know, but I
wanted the others is not a class on algorithms or on
multiplication algorithms. I want to use this to
highlight this idea that the grade school
algorithm seems very natural. It seems like obviously
the best way to do this. And it takes time. N squared over n squared is not the time complexity
of the problem. The problem itself has an
intrinsic time complexity. And the grade school algorithm, even though it's the
first way you learn to do this, does not meet it. And this is just sort of a sociological phenomenon
I've personally noticed, which is a very strange thing, which is that it seems to be that the better a person
gets at programming, the worse they get at
understanding this concept. Somehow like very
talented programmers tend to suffer from this belief that the very first
algorithm they thought of for a problem must
obviously be the best one. And it's not until
you really dig into theoretical computer science that you have this insight that NeuroNode, just because you thought
of an algorithm, doesn't make it an optimal algorithm. The problem itself has
some optimal algorithm. And it's our job to discover it or, you know, to prove that the best ones we already
have actually are optimal.