Okay, so we're going to
move into chapter two now and cover some of the basics
of the theory of computation. So we want to start with some definitions about what
exactly is it that we're studying. So we say a decision problem instance is just like an input
to an algorithm. So for example, if you're
given a graph, like, well, I'd say at this graph right
here, you want to know, is this graph Eulerian? In other words, does it have a path visiting each
edge exactly once? Now the decision problem, somehow like a bigger object. It's all possible instances
and their answer. So we can, we often will phrase
decision problems like this. We'll say given, and then we'll
describe the type of inputs. In this case, the type is a
graph g. When we just say graph, we mean undirected graph normally. In the question we want to
ask about that input is, is G or Librarian. Now, another way to formalize what is a decision problem is it's the set
of all Eulerian graphs, right? There's only two answers, yes and no. So if you know the set of all
inputs where the answer is yes, well then you also know all the
inputs for the answer's no, it's just accomplish graphs
that aren't in that set. So this says encodes the entire
decision problem in a sense. And another way that
we often formalize what is a decision problem is we acknowledge that typically
computers are going to be processing these data when they're
encoded as binary strings. And so we would say that the decision problem
is not a set of grass, it's a set of binary strings. But those that under some encoding of graphs represent the
graphs that are eulerian. And this is sometimes called
the language as well. So there's different ways
you could encode a graph as a binary string that can lead to
technically different languages. In this case, I'm showing if we use the adjacency matrix
representation of a graph, where I'm drawing
these binary strings as if they have rows and columns. But really this would
just be like this one right here would be a
single binary string with nine. That's it. But I'm
just trying them to, to help you see where each
row and then the next one D. Now contrast a decision problem
with a search problem, right? Where instead of
answering a question, does a certain type
of solution exists, we want to output
the actual solution. So in this case, the
search problem version of Eulerian path would
be given a graph, find or output an Eulerian path if one exists or report
that none exists. So if you can solve this
problem, of course, this is even better than
solving the decision problem. Another way to formalize what's
a search problem is that it's a function from 01 star to 01 star. And so it's describing this
function f is describing on input a string representing a graph. You want to output a
string represent in an Eulerian path in that graph
or some encoding of the word no, meaning there is no path to be found. And a special case of a function. Whose output is just a yes or no is sometimes called
a predicate, right? So the decision problem can be formalized as a function
similarly to a search problem, but the range would be different. Instead of being all 01 star, there's only two answers, yes and no, and sometimes
we call them 10. And when you see the word predicate, that means a function whose
output is Boolean sense. Okay, so that's a way of
defining what type of problem do we want to solve. But as computer scientists were interested in coming up with
algorithms to solve them. So a problem is solved by an algorithm that computes the function or predicate
associated to the problem. So the formal definition of
algorithm that we're going to use in this class is
actually not so formal. We're just going to say
it's a program written in whatever is your favorite
programming language. And typically, the more
traditional thing to do is to define an algorithm as
being a turning machine. And the textbook
differs discussion of Turing machines until
we've developed most of the basics of computational
complexity theory. Now I want to emphasize that Turing
machines are historically very important and still
relevant to understand. But I also want to emphasize
they're not really required to understand most of computational
complexity or computability. If you have in your head a general purpose
programming language that you'd like to think about, like maybe Python that is sufficient to understand
everything we're going to do. Most of what we're going to
do does not require, it, does not require understanding the low level sort of
definitions associated with say, a multi tape Turing machines. We will talk about them eventually. But for now, we're just going to rely on our intuition
from having programs. Okay, so let's start with
an example of an algorithm, a non-trivial algorithm
and a very old one. It's essentially the oldest
non-trivial algorithm, which is Euclid's algorithm for finding the greatest
common divisor of two. So we write that given
integers a and b, we want to find the greatest
common divisor of a and B. And to see how this algorithm works, we're going to sort of picture
this little geometrically. So here's two integers, 66 and 24. It turns out that their GCD is six. So because six is a
common divisor of these, it happens to be the greatest one, but just any common divisor. The following would be true. Which is that you can take a 24 by 66 tangle and partition it up into
six by six squares, right? So the width of the squares x, so it evenly fits into 24, the height of the squares six, so evenly fits into 66. And notice what's
going to happen here. If we look at 24 heights
along the record, when a 24 by definition is the width. But if we look at 24 height, and then we'll look at another 24. And we're going to ask, well, how many times does 24 fit into 66? We can see it fits once, twice, and then it doesn't quite
fit in a third time, right? It gets cut off. Or another way of
putting that is that the remainder when we divide six. 24 is 1866 mod 24 is 80. Okay, so that's in some sense the pictorial definition
of what mod means. It's how much you were able to fit in the last time when you
couldn't quite fit at all. And so look at what's
going to happen here. Six, because six is a common
divisor of both of these, it's going to fit evenly into 24, four copies of six to 24. And it's going to fit
evenly into the next one. And it's going to fit evenly
into the whole next one. But because it started right here, right at the start of this mod, that gave us 18, because that
is also fits evenly into 66. It has to fit evenly into
this difference right here. Or in other words, that's the pictorial
justification of this statement. That d is a common
divisor of a and B. If and only if it is a
common divisor of both be the smaller number and a mod b, which in this example is, is 80. So this gives us
essentially the algorithm, which is that whatever
is the greatest residue, this is true of any
divisor of a and B. It's also true of the
greatest common divisor. So we know that whatever is the greatest common
divisor of both of these, It's also the greatest common
divisor of b and a mod B. As long as they might
be, it's not actually 0. So we can use that to
implement an algorithm, right? So we want to know what's the
greatest common divisor of a and B. I'd like to assume a
is the bigger one here. So we'll say if a is
less than b, swap them. So now we're going to
assume a is bigger. Well, if a mod b is 0, that's exactly what it means
for B to be a divisor of a. And so we should just return b. B is obviously bees greatest divisor, so it's the greatest common divisor. But if not, we'll then
we're going to want to return the GCD of b and a mod B, knowing that that is equal
to the GCD of a and B. So let's just see it in action. If we want to know what's
the GCD of 66 and 24? Well, we compute their MOD, it's not 0, it's 18s. And now we let 24 BA
and we let 18 BB, and we compute 24 mod 18, and that's not 0 either. We get a remainder of six. So now we let a and B be 800000 six, and now 18 divided by 6 is 3. It's even so it fits evenly in there. So at 0, which means the
last positive number we add here that last version of B, that is sex, that is the GC. Okay, so there's a very
non-trivial algorithm. And we'd like to analyze, Well, how long does it take? How long does this algorithm take, and especially how long does
it take in the worst case, what's the worst possible
numbers we can give to this algorithm that would make
it run as long as possible. We'll talk about that
in the next video.