Okay, So we're now
going to look into how to somewhat formally define
what we mean by running time. I say somewhat because
we're going to follow the textbooks convention of being a little bit loose with somebody is, and I'll explain why in a bit. So we're going to measure running time as blue and anywhere else
as a function of the input size. So for example, we could
say an algorithm takes n squared steps on
inputs of size n, right? So it's not a single number
saying how long it takes. It's a function. How big your input? But then that begs the question, what is the size N of an
instance of a problem? For example, if we have
a graph G equals V, the nodes and the edges, That's the type of instance for the Eulerian path
problem. What's the size? Is the number of nodes in the graph. Is the number of nodes
plus the number of edges. A graph can have quadratically
more edges than it as nodes. Is it the length of
the string S sub g, where S sub G encodes the
graph and binary, for example, it could be the adjacency matrix, in which case it would have
exactly VI bits in it. And similarly for other types of problems and other
types of inputs, what is the size N of an instance AB of the greatest
common divisor problem. There's two inputs here, right? A and B. Two integers is the sum
of the two integers. Visit the max of the two. Is that the number of bits we
need to represent them, right? So log base two of a
plus log base 2 of b. And note that those numbers are much smaller than the
numbers themselves, right? By definition, they're logarithmically
smaller, or in other words, a is exponentially larger than
the number of bits you need to. So I'm going to leave these questions here as questions because
it's sometimes not obvious. Normally, we're going to
say that the right way to encode an integer is
in binary, right? And therefore, we would
say the size is the base two logarithm of
the integer itself. We're going to see
some reasons why for other decisions like
counting number of nodes in a graph versus number of edges versus number of bits
to encode the whole graph. It would matter in
an algorithms class when you want to get precisely
to how long it takes. But in computational
complexity theory will often give ourselves
permission to sorta, consider all the different answers we'd get in all those
different cases, roughly equivalent to jump. Okay? So if we have some notion
of how big our input it is, Here's how we formally
define running time. Well now we talked about how
to define the inputs is, but we want to measure the number of steps that the algorithm takes
on an input of that size. And what's a step? Again,
this is something aware. If we were in an undergrad class, I would just formally define it. I would say our model of computation is a single tape Turing machine, or maybe a multi tape Turing machine. And it's the number of
steps it runs into you. But I want to try to point
out that there's not one exactly right
answer to this problem. It kinda depends what. Since we've said, are, our notion of a model
of computation is just going to be whatever your
favorite programming languages. Because the claim of the theory of computation is to be able to give universally correct
answers to questions regardless of what kind
of computer you're using, regardless of what programming
language you're using. You know, it's not as easy to
define it formally in the sense, but there's some good
rules you should follow. Essentially one step should
be something like an atomic or a basic line of code
in an imperative program. So for example, an assignment
statement like a equals 4, we would generally think
of this as being a single. It takes constant time. We might say an assignment statement like a equals B plus C
is one line of code. Is this reasonable? Well, it kinda depends exactly
what you're trying to study. Adding B and C together might take awhile depending
on what you're trying to, if you're trying to study the exact number of steps
needed to do addition, you want to take into account, well, what if B and C are both
arbitrarily large integers as Python allows, well then it might not be okay
to say this is constant time. If I have a string
literal like ABCDE, assigning it into a variable
should take constant time. Um, and so we'd call that one step. Doing a Boolean check
like is a less than b. Again, normally we
would say something like this takes constant time. Now if those are very large
integers, it might not. But usually stuff like this. We'll say this counts as
one step of a line of code. So definitely things that
are not allowed, I can't, can't quite draw an
exact perfect line around everything that is alive. But we can definitely say something should not be considered
a single atomic step. So Python allows you to do
list comprehensions like that. So you could assign this
variable equals this list. What does this list? It's
constructed by running a for loop. The for loops inside the
definition of the list, this iterates over all integers
between 0 and n minus one. And if n is very big, this is going to take a while to run. So it's one line of code, but it would not be fair to call this a single step of the algorithm. If your one line of code
calls a subroutine that you had better take into account how
many steps that subroutine takes. Maybe this subroutine
runs for a long time. If your line of code
calls a library function, again, that's just
another subroutine. Maybe it's not one you wrote. Maybe it's one that's in the library, but it may not be okay to
call this constant time. Now, definitely if we have a very formal model of computation that's very
simple, like a Turing machine. Most people would
agree one transition of a Turing machine
counts as one step. If you have other models like a cellular automaton
for, for example, defined by an update rule, you might say one execution of
the update rule is one step. What about non imperative
programming languages, like a functional language
or a logical programming? Here you can't even talk
about steps because the, the method of execution
of these programs is not done imperatively
one step after another. There is an algorithm running in the background that you don't, right? That's the thing that the
interpreter does on your code. So for these, it would actually
depend on how the interpreter works and you'd have
to know more about the programming language to know
how long something will take. Now, we're not going to worry too much about the precise
definition here. And the reason is that much of
computational complexity theory just acknowledges that
we can only hope to get these sort of
universal truth about computational running time Up to
polynomial differences, right? So if you have one programming
language versus another, or one version of these
rules versus another, it might make a polynomial
difference that might cause you to say one algorithm is time n squared, while the same algorithm in another language might
be time in queue. And because we're already going
to make ourselves okay with saying that n squared and n cubed are close enough to both
be polynomial there vault, much more efficient than exponential. We're not going to worry
too much about this, but I'm just giving
you some guidelines for sort of what would be reasonable.