So we talked about coloring
of general graphs. But remember that special type
of graphs, a planar graph. This is one where it's possible to draw the nodes and edges so
that no two edges cross. And one problem that was famously
open for a very long time, but result in the
seventies is whether every planar graph is 4 colorable. And you could think of this as the mathematical formalization
of the state that every map can have the territory's colored with one of only four colors so
that any bordering territory's have different Viewers like this for coloring of
the United States here. And it was also sort
of a famous proof in that it was one of the first ones to be resolved enlarge
part with computers. And so there was a bit controversial for a while whether the
proof should be accepted, but it is of course accepted that every planar graph
is for countable. So that means in particular, there's kind of a trivial
statement we can make here that there's a simple
algorithm for planar, for color and so on. Input a planar graph, Yes, if you want to know, is a colorable, you simply output, yes, they're all four colors. So it's not really an interesting question in
light of the four color there. But an interesting question
is planar 3 coloring. Given a planar graph, G is G three colorable. The examples I showed
earlier of graphs that are and are not three
colorable were both planar. So the answer can sometimes be S, can sometimes be no. So suppose you had an algorithm for three coloring that
works on any graph. Well, it works on any graph, so it works on every planar graph. So it can be used to solve the special case planar
3 coloring problem. So this leads us to say that planar three coloring is
reducible to three column. I'll use this mathematical notation here or use a less
than or equal sign. I want to emphasize
it's not that these are numbers and we're saying one number is less than or equal to another, is just a notation where if
you want to think of this being a quantitative measurement
at something like the quote, hardness of the problems. So when we say planar three coloring
is reducible to 3 coloring, we're saying that
planar three coloring is no harder than three coloring. But again, it's not that
there's a number out there called hardness and
we're comparing them. It's just a mathematical notation. Now, theoretical computer scientists
have a lot of different ways of formalizing exactly
what reductions me. And we're going to follow the
convention of the textbook and not get too technical
with the formalization. So I just want to point out, I once wrote a paper a
long time ago that had some definition of a particular
kind of reducibility. And it starts here and it
has an even ended here. It gets down to here. And by this point you finally
get to the definition. So this is some formal definition of reducibility and I'm only
putting it up here to warn you, okay, If you go out
there in the literature, there's a lot of very
technical definitions of exactly what reducible means. We're not going to worry about them. We're just going to use the
intuitive definition that If you had an algorithm
for three color, you could use it in a quote, easy way to solve planar 3 color. That's what we need. That's why we say that planar
three coloring is no order. But now it's worth asking, well, is planar three coloring? It's strictly easier. Like should this be a
strict less than sign? Is it the case that, for example, there could be a faster algorithm that assumes the graph is planar. So we're going to argue
now, but that's not true. So planar three coloring is
as hard as three colors. Or to put it another way we
just flip these two around. We're going to show that 3 coloring is reducible to planar 3 color. In other words, we're
going to show that if you had an algorithm for planar 3 color, you could call it and only just once essentially in order
to solve the 3 coloring problem. So here's how you do it. We're going to start with a graph. And it may not be planar. And we're going to convert
it to a planar graph so that the new planar graph can be three colored if and only
if the original graph. So what is it that makes
a graph non planar? It's that you try to draw
the edges and across the chip so we can replace
the sum graph right here. So picture this a, B, C, and D. There is a subgraph
of a larger graph and there's an edge
AAC, another edge BD. If we can replace these with the larger subgraph that
maintains the color ability. In other words, it's three colorable now that means it'll
be three colorable after. And if it's not three colorable now, looking not three colorable after, then, we'll get a planar
graph and we can just ask this algorithm for planar 3
color in, Hey, what do you think? Is this graph three colorable? It'll give us the answer
to the original graph. So you replace it with this thing. So you can kind of
visually inspect and see that there's no
edges crossing here. So if you replace to
these four nodes and these two edges with all
these nodes and edges, you've gotten rid of that,
cross it and you could do this iteratively to every edge
crossing in your graph. And now we want to argue that we've maintained the three
color ability of the graph. So let's imagine that
you had a and b. Are these two colors, and we'll just call
them orange and green. And we want to argue that no matter
how you color the rest of it, if you were able to color DNC
different before, you still can. So if we look at this graph, we can see that a and b
are different colors here. So the middle one, we have no choice. It's connected to both, so it's gotta be the third color,
we'll call it blue. And then we can kinda do this move for a scene
or whenever we notice a node is connected to two other nodes that are
both different colors. It has got to be the third quarter. So this one right here
has gotta be green. Now we have a choice here. This node here is connected to two. Great. So we could color blue
or we could color it aligns. So we're going to do bowl.
We're going to come back. See, let's suppose
the colored in blue. How would that force r-hat? Well enforced this to be orange. It will force this to be blue, but for this to be green. And again, you can trace through
and see each time you're coloring a node that's connected to other nodes that
are different colors. So you have no choice. This is forced to be orange. This here is forced to be orange. This is forced to be green, and it's connected
to orange and blue. This is forced to be blue, and this is forced to be black. As you can see, there's
a fourth color that we need because we have
all three colors here. And there's nothing we can do here. Okay, so maybe that
was the wrong choice. We shouldn't call it disability. Let's color it orange instead. Okay, that forces our
hand here, here, here, here, here, here, here, and here. And we see, okay, so we just made the wrong choice
to color this blue. So essentially we are forced
to color this orange. And so we can get these and
then look at what's happened. Whatever was the color of B, we've forced the color of B
prime to be the same, that, and whatever was the color of a, we force the color of a
prime to be the same thing. So if you have some coloring of the original graph,
that works, right? When you do this replacement,
you might think, well, you're now no longer forcing the same constraint in
the original graph. C would have been forced to
be a different color than a. But C and a are not
connected anymore. But C is connected to a prime. And a prime is forced by the design of this graph in the middle to be the
same color as that. So essentially we've drawn a new
subgraph and it has no crossings. But it forces these
kinds of corners of the subgraph to have the same
color as the opposite corner. And so it's sort of propagated
the constraint, the cross. So this shows that if a and
b are different colors, and let's just call
them orange and green. It forces the colors on the
opposite side of each of them in this little gadget here
to be the same color as the one opposite it. So now we can say, well, what if a and B were the same color? And you can do a similar argument, you can trace through and show if a and B are both, let's say green, the only way to color
the middle of this thing forces B prime and a prime
to both be green as well. So in other words, if this
original graph is 3 colorable, this one over here will be
as well, and vice versa.