Okay, so let's look at another
type of combinatorial problem. So this is motivated in the textbook by talking about a dinner party
and early fancy dinner party. Where the authors say, suppose I have a bottle
of an excellent Palomar. It's like a wine, a fresh quail with a bird and some delicious
rockfall, that's Achaeans. And you make the observation that, well the Palomar pairs
beautifully with the quail. So it would be crazy to serve the bird without the
why the poem are. So we can formalize
that as the constraint. If quail Then palmar another, if we have the quail than
we should have the Palmer. And remember that conditional
statement is equivalent to not quail or are. So we can write that as
not q or p. So however, we choose to put this meal together, we should obey this constraint. We say, well such a light one and
the Palomar would be overwhelmed by the rope for so I can't possibly serve it and the
rock forward together. So in addition to this
constraint, we want to say, and we should satisfy the constraint, not p or not. My friend likes both
quail and ROCC for her. So I would like to serve
at least one of them. So we want to say and q or r. And finally, I simply must have at least the hallmark or
the quail and p or q. So we call this a Boolean formula. And it takes three inputs that are Boolean variables
called P, Q, and R. And it's satisfied, meaning we can set its value to one by
setting P equals one, q equals one, and r equals 0. You can trace through
that and see that. Now supposedly came up
with a new constraint. And we say, well, my
cats very fond of quail. I serve it without some
rogue 4 to distracter, my guest will find is
portions stolen away. So that means we've added a new
constraint it and not q or r. And it turns out this new formula is unsatisfiable no matter how
you assign values to p, q, and r, all eight of them
make this thing equal to 0, so it cannot be satisfied. So this is an example
of what we call a conjunctive normal form
Boolean formula or a CNF. Cnf formula is a conjunction, meaning an end of
what we call clauses. And a clause is a big OR of
formulas we call literals. And a literal is just one of
the inputs or its negation. So R is a literal, NOT P is a literal, NOT Q as a literal. And then you, or several of them
together and you get a clause. And then you take several clauses
and you take the end of them. And that is a CNF formula. So the formula is
satisfiable if there's an assignment of zeros and
ones to the variables, that makes it true, right? I'm assuming here 0 is
false and one is true. So one of the things that
makes a CNF formula nice is that there's a nice sort
of way to think about how do you satisfy a CNF formula? Well, it's a big end of clauses. And to make an end true, every individual
input has to be true. So in other words, you have
to satisfy every clause. That's what makes a
CNF formula satisfied. So the decision problem
we call CNF SAT is, given a CNF formula, is unsatisfiable, is there a way
to satisfy all of the clauses? The textbook calls this simply sat, but I prefer to use SAT for general formula is that
don't have the CNF form. There is sometimes a use
and doing non CNF formula. So I'm going to call this CNF SAT. Now, this is contained in NP. Why? Really pause and think about it. Well, the witness in this case is the satisfying
assignment, right? The way that I can prove to you that this formula is satisfiable is I give you an assignment of zeros and ones that you can just
plug into the formula. And you can just iterate over
each clause and make sure that that assignment
satisfies those clauses.