So before we get into some of the weeds of the
details of this course, we're going to start with
just a high level overview of some of the ideas we're
going to be covered. So we'll talk about a lot of
discrete objects in this course, and graphs will be chief among them. And remember that a
path in a graph is a sequence of nodes that
are connected by edges. And a cycle is a path that ends at
the same node where it started. And one particular kind of
cycle was studied by oil, or we call them an Eulerian cycle. And this is a cycle that visits every edge in the graph exactly once. So it's worth pausing for a second. Literally hit the pause
button to ask yourself, does either of these graphs
have an Eulerian cycle? Try to find one. Now it turns
out no, neither of them do. And in fact, Euler
proved a theorem that allows us to very
easily characterized when a graph has an Eulerian cycle, it happens if and only if
every node has even degree, meaning an even number of
edges connected to it. Now we can ask a slightly
different question. What if we didn't require
that the path be a cycle? We just want to know, is there a path that visits
each edge exactly once, but it may end at a different
node where it started. And in this case, there is unreal area and path in
G1, but not NG tube. And there's a similar
characterization. It's slightly more complicated
is that a graph has an Eulerian path if and only if all but up to two
nodes have even degree. So on the right, you can see that three of the no, or for the nodes B, C, D, and E have degree 3,
so it doesn't qualify. But on the left, D and
E have degree three, but a, B, and C all have even degree. So that's why there's
an Eulerian path. Now, Hamilton looked at
a very similar question, which is to ask, when does the graph of a cycle that
visits each node exactly once. It might skip some edges. But we want it to visit
each node exactly once. And turns out this graph does, may not be obvious that
there's a path through it. I'm sort of highlighted
the edges there. And we might want to
ask the question, okay, is there a similar simple
to check characterization? Just some simple
property of the nodes. How many edges each of them has. That would tell you when the
graph has a Hamiltonian cycle. It sounds like almost
the same problem. Alright, as Eulerian cycle, we just changed the
word edge to node. So it seems like there should be some similar
characterization that, but in fact, we don't know of him. We don't know of any easy way to check whether a graph
has a Hamiltonian cycle. So let's just think about
these two problems here. An Eulerian cycle visits
each edge exactly once. Hamiltonian cycle visits
each node exactly once. We have this symbol way to
characterize Eulerian cycles. And we can ask, well, if we turn that into an
algorithm that takes as input a graph and then
answers the yes, no question. Does it have one of these cycles? How much time will it take? We'll talk a little more in
future chapters about exactly how we measure the time
needed for algorithms. But it's going to roughly be
something like n squared. If n is the number of
nodes in the graph, kinda depends exactly how
you represent the graph. But the idea is that you
can iterate over each node. There's n of them. And then you can ask how
many neighbors does it have? And in the worst case, you have like an adjacency matrix which would involve iterating over
every other node to ask, is it connected or not? And incrementing a counter. So it would be n nodes. You have to check each
of them takes time and to count the
number of other nodes. And there's more efficient
ways to represent graphs, but it's at most
something like n squared. Whereas with a Hamiltonian cycle, we don't have any simple
characterization like this. The best thing we know
how to do would be to enumerate every single
cycle with EndNote, checking whether it's
a Hamiltonian cycle, meaning that it has each node in the graph
appearing on it exactly once. And if you think about how
many ways are there to, to take the end nodes in
a graph and that sort of permute them and then check
is that a valid cycle? In other words, each pair of
adjacent nodes connected by an edge. Well, there's n factorial
permutations of the n nodes. And n factorial is The
bigger than n squared. It's at least exponential and n. One kind of easy way
to see that is that it's n times n minus 1 times n minus
2 on down to at times 2 times 1. And most of the numbers in
this list are at least two. So that's going to be at least
two times itself and many times, which is what we mean by 2 to the n. So that's a lot bigger,
it's exponential. And in general, we don't know any better way to
answer that question. So we'd like to know, is there a fast way to decide if
a graph has a Hamiltonian cycle? And it turns out this is not
just some one-off question. This is a very fundamental question because as we're going to learn, if there's a polynomial-time
algorithm for this problem, then there are also polynomial-time
algorithms for thousands of other natural important
problems that we also don't know how to solve
in sub-exponential time. At the technical reason
for this is because the Hamiltonian cycle problem
is what we call NP-Complete. I'll define that formally later. And those other problems
are all contained in NP. And if the Hamiltonian cycle problem had a polynomial time algorithm, then all those other
problems, what is, well, that's the importance
of this problem and all the other so-called
NP-complete problems. So we might want to also ask
the question, well, if so, if there's a fast way to
decide the yes, no question. Is there a Hamiltonian
path in the graph? Is there a fast way
to actually find what usually this is what we want
to do in computer science. We're not happy to just know whether there's a solution to our problem. We would like to have the
solution itself like what is the path that visits
each node exactly once. So we call this the distinction between a decision
problem that has a yes, no output versus a search problem. That's generally like
if the answer is yes, what is the solution
integer then yes, if there's a fast way to
solve the decision problem, it turns out there's a fast way
to solve the search problem. The fact that the other implication follows is pretty easy
if you could solve the search problem given a graph, give me a Hamiltonian
cycle if it has one. Well, if you get an answer
out of it, the answer is yes. If you don't get it and answer, the answer to the
decision problem is no, it's not obvious that
decision problems, you know, are, are not any
easier than the search problems. But it turns out yes, it
if you could solve the, so the ostensibly easier
decision problem, you can also solve
the search problem. So here's a related question. Is there a fast way
to check solution? But what if I hand you? And I say, this is a
Hamiltonian path in this graph, is there a fast way to
check if I'm correct? In other words, this is the
distinction between searching for a solution and trying to find it versus verifying somebody's
purported solution. And it turns out yes, there is
also a fast way to do this. Okay, so let's think about
this distinction for a bit. This is going to be very
important to a lot of the course, finding solutions versus verifying that a purported solution
really is a solution. So for this problem of Hamiltonian
path given as input a graph G, we should output a Hamiltonian
path G if it exists. So the verification algorithm that takes as input
not just the graph, but also a suppose a path
that's a Hamiltonian. That the way it works is
you just check that p has exactly and unique nodes where n is the number of
nodes in the graph, right? You just iterate over all of them. Check that they all appear in the, that each of them only appears once, and that each consecutive pair is
actually connected by an edge. So we can think about other types of problems we want to solve
from a similar perspective. So let's consider factoring, which is a very important problem
in cryptography, for example. And one way to phrase
the factoring problem as a decision problem or
as a search problem. Meaning, given an input,
you want to get an output. You could say, well, on an integer and I want to output
the whole prime factorization. But just for simplicity, let's just consider this simpler
case where I just want to output two integers that are both bigger
than one, whose product isn't. Right? And it's worth pausing
for a second again, literally pause to think about, well, why is it that I'm calling
this the factoring problem and not the one that would output
the entire prime factorization. And the idea is, if you could solve this problem, you can just recursively
do it these integers p and q and figure out the
entire prime factorization. Once you get an answer of no, there is no such output. That means that the number is prime. So we don't know how to solve
this in polynomial time either. It's not known to be NP-complete. Most people think it's not, but we don't know how to solve
this in polynomial time. But there is a
verification algorithm, which is if I give you two integers
and they both bigger than one, you can check that their product is, then you can just multiply
them together efficiently. So this is yet another
example of a problem where we don't know how to
find solutions efficiently, but we do know how to verify whether a purported
solution really works. So it's worth contrasting
this with in some sense, the inverse problem to factoring, which is multiplication, right? This problem says given
as input two integers, p and q, output the integer
n such that PQ equals n. In other words, output their product. So this problem can be
solved efficiently. And this is essentially the verification algorithm
for the factoring problem. And the fact that one of
these seems to be difficult, but the other one is
easy is the reason it's useful in public-key cryptography. So, okay, so you
might start to think, well maybe all these problems that we encounter or maybe we don't know how to find solutions efficiently. Well, maybe all of
them have this flavor that even though we
can't find a solution, at least we can check
solutions efficiently, but that's not actually true of every problem you might want to say. Also, Let's consider chess. So let's suppose that the chess
problem is given as input, some board positions for chess
like what appears down here. I want to output if it exists, a checkmate strategy
for the white player. So I don't know much about chess, but supposedly this
board configuration as checkmate for a white
into 162 moons, right? So if white plays correctly air, it will win in a large
number of moves below. What would be the verification
algorithm for that? Like what, what proof could I
give to you that would convince you that white does have
a winning strategy. It really seemed like we
have to play the game. But even then, if I'm plane as
white and your plane is black, you're not going to be
convinced I had checkmate. All I'm going to do is convince
you that you made the wrong move. Maybe had you made different
moves, you might have one. So this is not one of
these problems are we even know how to verify purported
solutions quickly. In particular, the moves white needs to make might
depend on what blackness. So I can't just give a sequence
of moves for white to make. I have to give more like
a fully general strategy. Okay, so let's step back a bit and talk a little bit more about some of the lofty ideas we're going
to cover in this course. So the central theme
will be which problems have a shortcut that leads to a fast algorithm like Eulerian cycle. But we don't have to
check all the possible cycles to see is there one that visits each edge exactly once and which don't
appear to have a shortcut, which ones appear to require exhaustive search like
Hamiltonian cycle. Now many problems,
Hamiltonian path of a cycle, graph coloring Boolean
satisfiability. We'll talk about all
these eventually, although not protein folding. They're all equally hard in the sense that if any of them as an efficient algorithm
than all of them do. So why is that like what
do they have in common? Can we transform one of
these problems into it? We'll talk a lot about this. If there's an efficient algorithm
to find Hamiltonian paths. It turns out there's a lot
broader implications than just, there's some other
mathematical questions about discrete objects
that can be solved. It turns out that if this is true, then there's actually an
efficient algorithm to find short proofs of all the great
unsolved problems in mathematics, for example, the beam and hypothesis. This is one of the reasons
that people say if you could prove that P equals NP, and we'll talk about what, what that means in future lectures. You would have solved most of
the other open problems in mathematics because
you could just run this algorithm to define proofs. So this kinda goes against our intuition that such an
algorithm could even exist. So, is it the case that
mathematics is harder than this, requiring intuition and creativity
to solve these problems. In other words, can we prove
that finding proofs is offered? One question we're
going to touch on is, can one programming language solve
problems that another cannot? And what exactly is a
programming language? You've seen a lot of them. But in this course
we're going to kind of formalize what do we
mean by appropriately. And we're going to
see some examples of very simple systems using
counters and geometric tiles. They can actually do computation. And in doing so, I
want to kind of expand your idea of what exactly we mean by a system that can be programmed to automatically
process information? One question worth asking is, can all problems be
solved by an algorithm given unbounded hamiltonian path? We don't know how to do it quickly, but we do know how to do it
slowly in exponential time. Could we do that with every problem? And it turns out no,
the answer is no. There are certain problems that
cannot be solved no matter how much time you allow the
algorithm to run four. And we're going to spend most of
the course talking about time. But another important resource
to consider is space or memory. How much memory is required
to solve certain problems? And how does this relate to the time required to
solve the problem?