So the textbook makes the important observation
that the difference between polynomial and
exponential time is one of kind, not a degree, meaning essentially
it's a huge difference, it's not a minor difference. So remember, p is the class of decision problems solvable
in polynomial time. Now you'll often hear
this paraphrased as being the tractable
decision problems, meaning the ones that in practice, we can solve efficiently according to our standard intuitive notion
of what does efficient mean? It needs, it runs and halts by
the time you need the answer. Now, worth observing, and this
is a very common objection to hearing that theoretical
computer scientists obsess over this class P a lot. Which is that, yeah, not all polynomial time algorithms
really are tractable at the end of the 100 time algorithm
is not an efficient algorithm. It does not in general
hall, when you need it to, It would never halt in your lifetime for even
modest values of that. Okay, so given that, why do we care so much
about this class peak? What's the point of
thinking about it? Well, for one, there's sort of
a one way implication here, which is that if you can
show a problem is not in P, This generally does
imply it's intractable. If the best algorithm
you have doesn't even run in time and the 100, well then of course, there's no good algorithm
for that problem. So this is worth studying just for, for this kind of insight. But what's the real goal of studying? And it's that it tells
us something about the mathematical insight
into problem-solving. When you show that a problem is in P, generally means it has some
special structure that allows the algorithm to avoid an exponential time
brute force search. So once this insight is made, once somebody proves that a problem has a polynomial
time algorithm, other insights tend to follow and so do even more efficient algorithms. One example of this
for me is when it was discovered in 2002 that there's a polynomial time algorithm for determining whether an
integer is prime or not. If the integer has n bits, I think the original algorithm took something like time n to the 12, and it really wasn't practical. The randomized
algorithms that already existed that gave a good
answer with high probability, vastly outperform this one. And they were obviously the
thing to run instead of this. But after the original
paper was published, once people saw the insight
that had been made, they were able to work
on that and improve it and got it down to
time n to the sixth, which I think is
still worse than the, the existing randomized algorithms, but it was a lot better. And maybe someday somebody will
follow up on those insights and get like an n squared time algorithm
or a linear time algorithm. And we think that some
problems in this class, NP that we're going to talk
about in the next chapter, do not have this structure. We think, in other
words, P is not NP. And proving that is more
or less the top goal of theoretical computer
scientists in order to take advantage of this
observation right here, that if you can show
a problem is not NP, yeah, that really means
it's intractable. You're not going to be
able to solve it with an efficient and exact
always correct algorithm. Okay, So that wraps it up for
chapter two. Chapter three. We're not going to
cover it explicitly. It's a good chapter. It's a very good review
of essentially what you would cover in an undergraduate
algorithms textbook. So because ECS 120 to a is a
prerequisite for this course, we're not going to go
through this in lecture. So I'm going to assume
that everybody is familiar with the techniques and
the terminology from Chapter 3. But just in case you haven't
taken algorithms in a while, it's a good idea to review,
especially the following. Definitely we're going to
make heavy use of recursion. That section 31, divide and
conquer and dynamic programming. There's going to be a lot
of graphs in this course, we're going to talk a lot
about graph reachability, including breadth-first,
depth-first search, which I'll just assume that
you understand very well. And we're also going to allude to a few other more complex
graph algorithms like shortest path,
minimum spanning tree. And we're not going to dig much knew exactly how those algorithms work. But it is going to be important
for you to understand that each of these problems has a
polynomial time algorithm. And finally, reductions are going to be at the core of a
lot of what we do. So be sure to review
Section 38 as well.