So we've talked about this
class, NP informally. I promise that later we
would formally define it. But I'd rather first go through
some examples of problems and NDP, I think it's good to build
some intuition for what a formal definition is trying to capture before you actually
get to the formal definition. So let's start with this
problem of graph coloring. So let's think about this situation. Most conference talks are bored. They're born. So if you
find two interesting ones, it's better for you if they aren't
scheduled at the same time. So we have some constraints here. Each attendee states which talks they want to see. We're
going to try to schedule them. And there are k time slots. And the question is,
can we assign talks to time slots so that everyone can
see all the talks they want. So we can formalize
this using graphs, as with most problems, into the k coloring problem. And the k coloring problem is this. You're given a graph G equals V E, or the set V of nodes is the set of all the talks and the set of
edges capture the constraint. There's some person who wants
to see both of those talks. So an edge uv is any, if there's somebody somewhere out there who wants to see
both of the talks. So in other words, they should not
be scheduled at the same time. And the question is, can we color the nodes
in V with only K colors? K is a constant here. In other words, can we assign talks
to the K different time slots? So colors here or like timeslots, so that all neighboring
nodes have different colors. In other words, all talks are
scheduled at different times. This is called a proper
k coloring of G. Okay, so let's some examples. Here's a graph on the left, and it's three colorable, right? I've used three colors, blue, orange, and gray to colour at. And if you go through
each edge and check, you can see every single edge is connecting two nodes that
have different colors. On the right, There's another graph, and it's been colored
here with four colors, blue, orange, gray, and black. And it turns out the one on the
right is not three colorable. Why is that? It's worth
thinking. Pause for a second. So you can see that the middle
node is connected to every other. So whatever color you assign here, let's call it black. It's gotta be different than
every other color around here. Okay, So now you have this ring
of five nodes around the edge. How many colors does
it take to color that? Well, it's a cycle with an
odd number of nodes here. So to make the whole
thing three colorable, just the edge would have
to be two colorable because all those colors have
to be distinct from the metal. But you can't to color
it whatever you color, say the very first ones
that you color it, gray. That means the one clockwise, it's gotta be the opposite color, blue if you had only two. And the one next to that is going
to be back to the first gray. The one next to that
has to be back to blue. And then the next one
would have to be gray, but that would conflict
with this one up here. So that's an argument that
if he had any odd cycle, you need at least three colors. So if you then connect
all them to a fourth one, you need at least four colors. So it's not three color. So this looks like just a fun little combinatorial
problem on graphs, but it actually has
many applications. This comes up a whole lot. So, for example, you might want
to assign different frequencies to close wireless devices
so that they don't talk over each of the colors
would be frequencies here. So I'm going to claim here that the k coloring problem
is contained in NP. So Posner and how to think
about that. Why is that true? Well, most problems that are in
NP are phrased in such a way that the statement of the
problem actually gives you the reason why it's an NP. So what makes a problem in NP? If it has a simple proof that can be checked with a
polynomial-time algorithm. So what's the simple proof
that a graph is k colorable? It's the k coloring, right? You just give a coloring of the nodes and then it is simple
to check by just looking at every edge and make sure every edge is connecting
two nodes are different. Okay? Now it turns out the problem
of two-coloring is NP. Why is that the pause for us? Well, what does a
two colorable graph? If you think about it, it's the
same thing as a bipartite graph. A bipartite graph is one whose
nodes can be divided into two subsets so that there's no edge between any two
nodes within the same set. All the edges are between the
nodes on either side, right? So telling whether a
graph is two colorable is the same thing as telling
whether it's bipartite. So how could you come up
with an algorithm for this? Well, you can just say once
I know the color of a node, I don't immediately, and
there's only one other color. I've got a color all its
neighbors the opposite color. And I've got a color all their
neighbors, the first color. And you can kind of
bounce through the graph, figuring out if there is a
two-coloring, how to assign it. And at some point you'll
either completely finish, you will color the entire
graph with only two colors, or you'll discover, oh, you, you want to assign
one color to another. That's already been assigned to the opposite color and you can't do it. So you get a contradiction.