So with a somewhat formal definition of running time in order we can come back and we can analyze the time complexity of this
Euclidean algorithm that we defined. So there's the code in Python
for the Euclidean algorithm. Now the input is a pair
of integers a and b. So we have two inputs,
so we got to somehow combine them to get one input size. And we're going to say the size N is the number of bits
of a and B together. Let's just, for the sake
of making this easy, ease and they both require, and that's if b is much
smaller, maybe it doesn't. But you can imagine padding it with zeros until it also requires it. So What we're gonna do is we're just going to count how
many divisions we need, right? So on an input of size n, we're going to say we
need d of n divisions. And how will that turn into the time? Well, if we know that
each division takes time T of n on inputs of size n, then the total time complexity
is going to be T and N times d. And we're going to analyze this
is with a couple of exercises. I won't work it out here, but we can talk about it in
discussion that we need. So the first to think about and stop and think about
this for a second. Try to see why it's true. If a is bigger than b,
bigger than or equal to b, then a mod b is less
than a over 2, right? No matter how a and B are related, you take a mod b and the result
is less than half of it. The other thing to think about is that we can look at this algorithm
air and use this first fact and get that Euclid's algorithm
is going to perform at most to log a divisions, right? And because log of a is, and that's how we're defining
it as two n total division. So a linear number of divisions. And if we use the sort of grade
school algorithm for division, this whole thing that is
going to take o of n squared. And that's a problem in the textbook. Okay? Let's go to a different
problem for factoring, right? So the factoring problem is
going to look like this. We'll formalize it as our
input is an integer m And its size is going to be
log base two of n, right? We'll call that number n. So m is about two to the n. All right, we're going to
say that the factoring problem is to find some factor of atom in the range of integers
between two and n minus 1. If it exists, maybe n is prime, then it would have no such factor. But if it does exist, we just want to find one of them. So one thing to think
about and seriously, pause for a second
and think about this. Why is this enough to help us find
the whole prime factorization? The sounds like a lot crush. This is we're not getting the
whole prime factorization. We're not even necessarily
getting a prime factor, we're just getting some factor and good if the PH composite as well. But just think for a second how
you would use an algorithm for this problem to actually get
the whole prime factorization. Okay, so here's the obvious
algorithm to try to solve this problem. Find factor. And this is sort of Python code and my pseudocode looks
a lot like Python, but I give myself deliberately to just do straight up
pseudo-code sometimes. So what we're gonna do is just
search every potential divisor d in this range between two and
the square root of m plus one. We're going to check what
happens when we divide by d. Do we get a remainder 0 or not? And the claim is that
that's enough to tell if there's a factor in the range
from two up to m minus one. So that's worth thinking
about for a second. And then we just say, okay, if any of those potential divisors divide m cleanly with no
remainder there divisor, so we can return that number. It would be a factor that case. Okay, so again, using
our sort of metric as the number of divisions
being the key thing here. And then we can just multiply that by the time needed to do divisions. How many divisions? What happened here? Well, it's
fairly simply a for loop. It has about square root of m terms and each one we do a single
division to get this mod. So we're doing square root
of n divisions, which is, now remember we have to express this as a function of our input size, as our size is not, our size is the number of
bits needed to represent. So we needed log of n
bits to represent m, which is n. And so m
to the 1.5 is the same as 2 to the n to the 1.5, which is two to the n over two. So this is the sort of naive
way to try to do factoring. Now the best-known algorithm is a thing called the number field CVE. And it's quite a bit faster than, rather than raising two to a
power that's like linear in n, u raised to a power that's something
like the cube root of that. So it's significantly faster, still exponential time technically, but better than the naive them. And it's believed by many people, not everybody but many people, that there is in fact no polynomial
time algorithm for factoring. There is an order n cubed
time quantum algorithm.