Views on Visualization
Jarke J. van Wijk, Member ,IEEE
Abstract —The field of visualization is maturing. Many problems have been solved and new directions are sought. In order to make
good choices, an understanding of the purpose and meaning of visualization is needed. In this paper, visualization is considered from
multiple points of view. First, a technological viewpoint is adopted, where the value of visualization is measured based on effectiveness
and efficiency. An economic model of visualization is presented and benefits and costs are established. Next, consequences andlimitations of visualization are discussed (including the use of alternative methods, high initial costs, subjectiveness, and the role of
interaction). Example uses of the model for the judgment of existing classes of methods are given to understand why they are or are
not used in practice. However, such an economic view is too restrictive. Alternative views on visualization are presented and
discussed: visualization as an art, visualization as design and, finally, visualization as a scientific discipline.
Index Terms —Visualization, evaluation, validation, methodology, survey, challenges.
/C230
1I NTRODUCTION
MODERN society is confronted with a data explosion.
Acquisition devices such as MRI-scanners, large scale
simulations on supercomputers, but also stock trading atstock exchanges produce very large amounts of data.Visualization of data makes it possible for researchers,analysts, engineers, and the lay audience to obtain insightinto these data in an efficient and effective way thanks tothe unique capabilities of the human visual system, whichenables us to detect interesting features and patterns in ashort period of time.
Many of us will have written paragraphs like the
preceding one, where I attempted to give the standard
rationale of our field. In 1987, when the US National ScienceFoundation’s (NSF) influential ViSC report [20] appeared,the expectations were high. Visualization was consideredvital and highly promising for the scientific process. In thetwo decades since the report, much progress has been
made. The advances in graphics hardware are astonishing;
most laptop computers are graphics superworkstationsaccording to the standards of just a decade ago. Manynew methods, techniques, and systems have been devel-oped. Some of them, such as slices, height-surfaces, andisosurfaces are now routinely used in practice.
On the other hand, many of these new methods are not
used in real-world situations. Many research results are
nowadays considered as incremental by reviewers and our
prospective users rarely attend our conferences. So, are we,as researchers in visualization, on the right track?
With this paper, I want to contribute to the discussion on
the status and possible directions of our field. Rather thanpinpointing specific topics and activities, my aim is todetect overall patterns, to find a way to understand andqualify visualization in general, and to enumerate a numberof perspectives on visualization. This is an ambitious and
vague plan, although the basic point of departure for this ishighly practical.
I have to make decisions on visualization in many roles.
As a researcher, these decisions range from in which area to
invest time to which particular solution to implement; as a
supervisor, guidance to students must be provided; as areviewer, new results and proposals for new research mustbe judged and opinions are expected on whether they areworth publishing or funding; as an advisor to a start-up
company, novel and profitable directions must be spotted.
All these cases imply judgment of the value of visualizationin varying senses.
How does one assess the value of visualization?
Visualization itself is an ambiguous term. It can refer to
the research discipline, to a technology, to a specific
technique, or to the visual result. In the following, I use“value of visualization” as shorthand for “the value of oneparticular visualization met hod, technique, system, or
result,” in contrast to the value of visualization in general.
One aim, however, is to find a generic approach to assessthe value of such particular visualizations.
If visualization is considered as a technology, i.e., as a
collection of methods, techniques, and tools developed and
applied to satisfy a need, then standard measures apply:
Visualization has to be effective and efficient . In other words,
visualization should do what it is supposed to do and has todo this using a minimal amount of resources. Oneimmediate and obvious implication is that we cannot judge
visualization on its own, but have to take into account the
context in which it is used.
In Section 2, a short overview is given of the background of
the topic discussed here. In Section 3, an economic model ofvisualization is proposed. The basic elements are identified
first, the associated costs and gains are added next. Various
implications of the model are discussed in Section 4. InSection 5, this model is applied to several cases. However,considering visualization as a technology is just one of thepossible views. In Sections 6, 7, 8, and 9, visualization is
considered from the viewpoint of innovation, art, design, and
science, respectively. Conclusions can be found in Section 10.IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 12, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2006 421
.The author is with the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science,
Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, PO Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven,The Netherlands. E-mail: vanwijk@win.tue.nl.
Manuscript received 13 Nov. 2005; revised 30 Jan. 2006; accepted 6 Feb. 2006;
published online 10 May 2006.For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to:tvcg@computer.org, and reference IEEECS Log Number TVCG-0162-1105.
1077-2626/06/$20.00 /C2232006 IEEE Published by the IEEE Computer Society
This paper is an extended version of [31]. The first
version was primarily focussed on valuation of visualiza-
tion; here, the emphasis is shifted to multiple perspectives
on visualization.
Finally, the views presented here are, on one hand, very
general, high-level, and abstract; on the other hand, they are
also very personal, in the sense that they concern (sub-jective) values, valuation of my own work, and personal
perspectives. To reflect this, I use the first person in this
paper, to emphasize that the opinions given are personal.
Most examples that I use come from my own work, often
developed collaboratively with coworkers. The main reason
for this presentation style is simply that I am most familiar
with it, not only with the techniques and results, but also
with the context in which it took place.
2B ACKGROUND
If we use the publication of the ViSC report [20] in 1987 as
the year when visualization started, our discipline cele-
brated its 18th anniversary in 2005. In The Netherlands, this
is the age at which a person is considered mature. Many
things have changed since 1987. Graphics hardware
developments are amazing and, so, is the large number of
techniques that have been developed to visualize data in a
variety of ways. For new cases, visualization experts canconcentrate on interesting and hard problems, instead of
having to write straightforward code from scratch.
However, there are signs that there is a need to
reconsider visualization. First of all, there seems to be a
growing gap between the research community and its
prospective users. Few attendants at the IEEE Visualization
Conference are prospective users looking for new ways to
visualize their data and solve their problems. Second, the
community itself is getting both more specialized and
critical, judging from my experience as paper cochair for
IEEE Visualization 2003 and 2004. In the early nineties, the
field lay fallow and it was relatively easy to come up withnew ideas. The proceedings in the early nineties show great
diversity. Today, the field is getting more specialized,
submitted work often consists of incremental results. This
could be a signal that our field is getting mature. Advances
in the hard sciences are often highly incremental, with
breakthroughs sometimes being small changes on basic
concepts, which are viewed as incremental by nonexperts.
On the other hand, it is not always clear that these
incremental contributions have merit and reviewers aregetting more and more critical. Third, some major problems
have been more or less solved [18]. For volume rendering of
medical data, sophisticated industrial packages that satisfy
the needs of many users are available.
These trends suggest an urgent need to reconsider the
field and to consider new directions. Several researchers
have presented [10], [12], [21], [8] overviews of current
challenges. Another great overview of the current status of
visualization and suggestions for new directions is pro-
vided by the position papers [3] contributed by theattendants of the joint NSF-NIH Fall 2004 Workshop on
Visualization Research Challenges, organized by Terry Yoo.
One contribution [18] is particularly disturbing, for its title,
the name and fame of the author, and the vivid descriptionthat indeed the field has changed and new directions are
needed. Finally, a very impressive overview of the field andrecommendations for future directions is provided inIlluminating the Path , edited by Jim Thomas and Kristin
Cook [24]. Visual analytics is the central topic here, definedas the science of analytical reasoning facilitated by inter-
active visual interfaces.
Many issues are mentioned several times, including
handling of complex and large data sets, uncertainty,validation, and a better understanding of the visualizationprocess itself. Very high on the lists is integration with thetasks of the user. This holds especially for visual analytics[24], where the focus is shifted from visualization to theoverall sense-making process.
In this paper, no attempt is made to summarize or to
provide an overview of these challenges, but the field is
considered from a greater distance. First, an attempt ismade to find a model or procedure to judge, in general, if amethod is worthwhile or not. In the following sections, afirst step toward such a model is presented. Much of it isevident and obvious, but some statements made are moresurprising and sometimes contrary to main stream thinking.To stimulate the debate, I have taken the liberty ofpresenting these more extreme positions also, hoping that
some readers will not be offended. After these critical
reflections, the point of view is shifted and from thesedifferent perspectives other criteria emerge.
3M ODEL
In this section, I propose a generic model for visualization.First, the major ingredients are identified; then, costs andgains are associated. The model is abstract and coarse, but it
can be used to identify some relevant aspects, patterns and
trends.
3.1 Visualization and Its Context
Fig. 1 shows the basic model. Boxes denote containers,circles denote processes that transform inputs into outputs.The aim here is not to position different visualizationmethods, for which a taxonomy would be a more suitableapproach, but rather to describe the context in whichvisualization operates. No distinction is made, for instance,between scientific visualization and information visualiza-
tion. At this level, they are considered to have much in
common.
The central process in the model is visualization V. Data D
is transformed according to a specification Sinto a time422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 12, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2006
Fig. 1. A simple model of visualization.
varying image IðtÞ. All these variables and functions should
be considered in the broadest sense. The type of data Dto be
visualized might vary from a single bit to a time-varying 3D
tensor field; the specification Sincludes a specification of the
hardware used, the algorithms to be applied (in the form of a
selection of a predefined method or in the form of code), and
the specific parameters to be used; the image Iwill often be an
image in the usual sense, but it can also be an animation, or
auditory or haptic feedback. In other words, this broad
definition encompasses both a humble LED on an electronic
device that visualizes whether the device is on or off, as well
as a large virtual reality set-up to visualize physical andchemical processes in the atmosphere. The image Iis
perceived by a user, with an increase in knowledge Kas a
result. The amount of knowledge gained depends on the
image I, the current knowledge Kof the user, and the
particular properties of the perceptual and cognitive abilitiesPof the user. Concerning the influence of K, a physician will
be able to extract more information from a medical image
than a lay-person. But, also, when much knowledge is already
available, the additional knowledge shown in an image can
be low. A map showing the provinces of the Netherlandsprovides more new information to a person from the US than
to a Dutch national. Also, the additional value of an image of
time-step 321 is probably small when time-step 320 has just
been studied before. Concerning the influence of P, a simple
but important example is that a colorblind person will be lesseffective in extracting knowledge from a colorful image than a
person with normal visual capabilities. But, also, some people
are much better than others in spotting special patterns,structures, and configurations.
The current knowledge KðtÞis the sum of the initial
knowledge K
0and all knowledge gained from the images
viewed so far.
An important aspect is interactive exploration, here,
represented by EðKÞ. Starting from an initial specification
S0, the user may continuously change the specification of the
visualization, based on his current knowledge, in order to
explore the data further.
3.2 Economic Model
To assess whether a visualization method is worthwhile, wemust consider its value. I propose using profitability in aneconomic sense as a measure for this. I simplify this by
assuming that there is a homogeneous user community,
consisting of nusers which use a certain visualization Vto
visualize a data set mtimes each, where each session takes
kexploratory steps and time T. This is a crude simplifica-
tion of course. In the real world, the user community will
often be highly varied, with different K
0s and also with
different aims. The costs associated with using Vcome at
four different levels:
.CiðS0Þ: Initial development costs . The visualization
method has to be developed and implemented,possibly new hardware has to be acquired.
.C
uðS0Þ: Initial costs per user . The user has to spend
time on selection and acquisition of V, understand-
ing how to use it, and tailoring it to his particularneeds..C
sðS0Þ: Initial costs per session . Data have to be
converted and an initial specification of the visuali-zation has to be made.
.C
e: Perception and exploration costs . The user has to
spend time to view and understand the visualiza-tion, as well as to modify and tune the specification,thereby exploring the data set.
The total costs are now given by
C¼C
iþnCuþnmC sþnmkC e:
The return on these investments consists of the value
Wð/C1KÞof the acquired knowledge /C1K¼KðTÞ/C0Kð0Þper
session, multiplied by the total number of sessions:
G¼nmW ð/C1KÞ
and, hence, for the total profit F¼G/C0C, we find
F¼nmðWð/C1KÞ/C0Cs/C0kCeÞ/C0Ci/C0nCu:
This gives us a recipe to decide on the value of a
visualization method. Positive are high values for n,m,
Wð/C1KÞ, and low values for Cs;Ce;Ci;Cu, and k. Or, in
other words, a great visualization method is used by many
people, who use it routinely to obtain highly valuableknowledge, without having to spend time and money on
hardware, software, and effort. Indeed, quite obvious.
4I MPLICATIONS
Quantification of the elements of the model is hard. In thissection, we discuss this in more detail, as well as a number
of other issues implied by this model.
4.1 Valuable Knowledge
Insight is the traditional aim of visualization. The term itselfis great and suggests a high-level contribution to the
advance of science. Users are enabled to see things they
were not aware of, and this insight helps them to definenew questions, hypotheses, and models of their data.
However, from an operational point of view, the term
insight does not help us much further in assessing the valueof visualization. One problem is that we cannot directly
observe or measure how much insight is acquired and, also,
it is difficult to assess what the value of that insight is. In themodel, we use the term knowledge, but this suffers from the
same limitations. Also, there is a strange paradox in the
basic paradigm of visualization. We do not know whatinformation is contained in the data, hence we use visuals to
get insight. But, if we do not know which specific aspects or
features should be visible, we cannot assess if we aresuccessful or not.
Nevertheless, we should try to measure or estimate
Wð/C1KÞif we want to assess the value of visualization,
especially because it is the only term in the model for F
with a positive sign. An operational approach is to consider
the use of visualization as an element in problem solving.
Users have a problem, they must decide which action totake, and, to make that decision, they need information. The
visualization should enable them to extract the relevant
information from the data.VAN WIJK: VIEWS ON VISUALIZATION 423
Decisions are typically about actions to be taken or not.
Such decisions include, for instance: “Should a stock be
bought or sold?”, “Should this patient receive an opera-tion?”, or “Which people in an organization are candidatesfor promotion?” Hence, I recommend to my students to
search for and enumerate possible actions of users after
using their prospective tools. If such actions cannot befound or defined, the value of visualization is in doubt. Just
claiming that a visualization gives insight is not enough if
we want to offer additional value.
If we know to which actions the visualization should
lead, the next steps are assessing whether the knowledgederived from the visualization does indeed support the
decision and, also, to assess the economic value of this
decision. This is not easy, but one can try, for instance, toestimate how much time is saved or try to quantify the
consequences of a wrong decision.
4.2 Alternative Methods
Efficiency is relative, an aspect that is not capturedexplicitly in the model. One could predict a high value for
Ffor a new method; however, if other methods are
available to obtain the same knowledge with lower costs,
then it is very likely that the value of nis overestimated. Or,
stated simply, if a better solution already exists, nobody willuse the newer one. The model is too simple here. The
effective value of nitself is not a parameter, but a function
of, among others, the perceived benefit by potential users.Also, alternative methods can have higher benefits againstthe same costs. In economic terms, opportunity costs should
also be considered here, and not only accounting costs.
Developers of new visualization methods should be
aware of alternative solutions and carefully study theiradvantages and limitations. New methods are not better bydefinition. Especially, when existing methods are heavily
used in practice, they have been proven to have value. It is
often hard to beat straightforward solutions; for instance, inmany cases, just using a line graph is the best way to show a
time-varying signal.
A defense often heard for the lesser performance of new
methods compared to existing ones is that the users havenot had enough time to get accustomed to them. In somecases, this might hold, but an equally viable hypothesis is
that an existing method is simply better. For instance, just
showing a set of objects in a list enables linear scanning,whereas scanning a fancy 2D or 3D display where the
objects are distributed over space is much harder [23].
Alternative methods are not limited to visualization
methods. For instance, when an automatic method exists toextract the relevant information, visualization is useless.Visualization is not “good” by definition, developers of new
methods have to make clear why the information sought
cannot be extracted automatically. One reason could be thatsuch automated methods are not guaranteed to give the
target result. In this case, integration of automated methods,
for instance, from statistics or data-mining, and visualiza-tion is a great idea, see, for instance, the work underwayand led by Jim Thomas in the visual analytics arena [24].
Fig. 2 shows an example where we used standard
methods in a new combination [34]. For the analysis of a
time-series of one year, daily patterns were clustered, i.e.,finding similar daily patterns was automated. The results
are shown using two conventional representations: Average
daily patterns of clusters are shown as graphs and the days
per cluster are shown on a calendar. The approach is
straightforward and conventional and very effective.
4.3 High Initial Costs
One important reason that new visualization techniques arenot used in practice is the high initial cost per user C
uðS0Þ
involved. Let us consider potential customers for visualiza-
tion, for instance, researchers doing complex simulations.
First, they have to realize that maybe visualization can helpthem to understand their data. This is not obvious. They
already use some methods to extract information from their
results in a condensed form. For instance, in molecular
dynamic simulations, one typical aim is to derive large scale
quantities (temperatures, porosity, etc.) via simulation fromthe properties on a small scale (size of ions, fields, etc.).
Such large scale quantities can be calculated fairly easily
from the raw data. Mathematicians working in computa-
tional fluid dynamics are often not interested in particular
flow patterns, but rather in the convergence of numericalmethods and conservation of quantities, which again can be
calculated easily and summarized in a few numbers.
The easiest way to visualize data is to use postprocessing
capabilities that are integrated into the software used. For
instance, commercial packages for computational fluid
dynamics or finite element simulation offer such visualiza-
tion postprocessing capabilities. From a visualization point
of view, the techniques offered are far from state of the art:Usually, just options like isosurfaces, color mapping,
slicing, streamlines, and arrow plots are provided. But, if
these meet the demands of our users, then this is highly
cost-effective.
Suppose that this option is not available or is inadequate.
The next step is to find alternatives. Our researchers have toget acquainted with possible solutions. Unfortunately, there
are no books that present and compare novel visualization
techniques (like volume rendering or topology-based flow
visualization) at an introductory level. So, they have to
study research papers, or search and get in contact withexperts in the field.
Following steps are also costly. Maybe they can get a
research prototype to work with or else they have to (or let424 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 12, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2006
Fig. 2. Visualization of daily patterns [34], an example of the combined
use of conventional statistical and graphical methods.
somebody) implement the novel techniques. Often, addi-
tional software has to be developed to convert their data toa suitable format.
This all takes much time and effort, while it is unclear
whether the new method will indeed solve their problem.Hence, a rational decision is to abstain from this.
There are, of course, ways to share the initial costs with
others. A group of researchers can take advantage of an initial
investment by one of them. Also, providers of simulation
software can be asked to integrate new methods. Visualiza-
tion does not seem to have a high priority here, however. Foran impression of what providers think to be important for
their customers, we can have a look at Web sites of companies
like MSC or Fluent, and observe that features like advancedsimulation capabilities and tight integration are promoted
much more than visualization, which is just mentioned in
passing labeled as postprocessing.
4.4 Visualization Is Subjective
In the ideal case, one would hope that extraction ofknowledge from data is an objective process, in the sensethat the outcome does not depend on who performs it, and
that the analysis can be repeated afterward by others, with
the same outcome. Statistics aims at this, a typical pattern is
the use of statistical tests to validate hypotheses on the data.
Such tests make assumptions on the data (such as a normaldistribution) and have free parameters (like the confidence
level), but, furthermore, they do meet the criteria for
objectiveness.
Unfortunately, visualization often does not meet this
aim. Consider
dK
dt¼PðVðD; S; t Þ;KÞ:
This simply means that the increase in knowledge using
visualization not only depends on the data itself, but also on
the specification (for instance, which hardware has been
used, which algorithm has been used, and which para-meters), the perceptual skills of the observer, and the a priori
knowledge of the observer. Hence, the statement that
visualization shows that a certain phenomenon occurs is
doubtful and subjective.
An even harder case is the statement that a certain
phenomenon does not occur. I have often spent hoursvisualizing data, searching for patterns and structure.
Sometimes some result could be produced using a
particular setting of the parameters, in other cases, I failed
to do so. When a visualization does not show clear patterns,
it is hard to decide if this is a limitation of the visualizationmethod or an indication that the setting of the parameters
was wrong or that the data simply does not contain
significant patterns.
This does not mean that visualization is useless. If there are
no better alternatives to inspect complex data, visualization
has to be used. Another line of defense is that visualization
should not be used to verify the final truth, but rather to
inspire new hypotheses, to be checked afterward. Part of the
subjectiveness can be eliminated by simply showing thevisualization to the audience so that they can view and judge
it themselves. However, this does not take away the
subjectiveness inherent in Sas a secondhand viewer; we donot know how sensitive the ultimate visualization is to
changes in scales and/or selections of the data.
4.5 Negative Knowledge
In the previous section, we considered subjective aspects ofvisualization. There is another problem: Visualizations can
be wrong and misleading. That is, in the terminology
introduced here, negative knowledge ( j/C1Kj<0) can be
produced. Tufte has introduced the lie-factor [28], which he
defined as the ratio of the size of an effect shown in thegraphic to the size of the effect in the data.
Here, it suffices to give an example of my own
experience. A long time ago, I visualized the wavesproduced by ships for a maritime research institute. Thedata were the result of simulations. Fig. 3a shows the result
of bilinear interpolation of the data. I found these results
unclear, hence, I decided to use an interpolating spline,thereby smoothing the surface while remaining faithful tothe data. Fig. 3b shows clearly that two sets of waves aregenerated: the standard waves as well as a set of wavesorthogonal to this. I proudly presented this discovery to theresearcher, who immediately replied that this was physi-cally totally impossible. A much better visualization isshown in Fig. 3c, where an approximating spline is used.The artifacts in the middle image are the result of aliasing.
The data orthogonal to the ship are sampled close to the
Nyquist frequency; interpolation gives rise to aliases, whichcorresponding waves have in this 2D case a differentdirection than the original wave. An interpolating splineVAN WIJK: VIEWS ON VISUALIZATION 425
Fig. 3. Wave surface, from top to bottom: (a) bilinear interpolation,
(b) cubic interpolation, and (c) cubic approximation. Incorrect interpola-
tion leads to artifacts.
smoothes away the high frequencies, but the first aliases
survive and give rise to wrong interpretations. I learnedfrom this that interpolation is not by definition better thanapproximation and also that the judgment of an expert,with a high K
0, is vital for proper interpretation and
validation. I never published this and, also, articles onlimitations and pitfalls of visualization are scarce. For theadvancement of the field, more such reports would behighly beneficial.
4.6 Interaction
Interaction is generally considered as “good.” One couldadvocate the opposite: Interaction should be used carefullyand sparingly for two reasons. First of all, as mentionedbefore, allowing the user to modify Sfreely will lead to
subjectiveness. It is tempting to tune the mapping so thatthe desired result comes out strongly, but this can bemisleading. Also, high customization can make it hard tocompare different visualizations. Second, interaction iscostly and leads to a high C
e. Rerendering the image after
a change of the mapping or the point of view taken oftenrequires a few seconds, viewing it again also. If manyoptions are available to modify the visualization, trying allof them out can take hours. A developer of a new method,therefore, should think carefully about good defaults orautomatic ways to set the visualization parameters so thatas much knowledge is transferred as possible.
Obviously, in many cases, interaction strongly enhances
the understanding of the data. The most important case issimply when the amount of data to be shown does not fit onthe screen or is too large to be understood from a singleimage. In this case, navigation and selection of the data hasto be supported to enable the user to interactively explorethe data.
Another case for interaction is during development of new
methods. I encourage my students to make every aspect oftheir new methods customizable via user interface widgets sothat the total solution space can be explored. However, for thefinal versions of their prototypes, I recommend offeringsuitable presets under a few buttons so that a goodvisualization can be obtained with little effort.
5E XAMPLES
In this section, a number of (classes of) techniques areconsidered and the cost model is used to explain theiradoption in practice.
5.1 Texture-Based Flow Visualization
The use of texture to visualize fluid flow was introduced inthe early nineties. The idea is that dense textures enableviewers to judge the direction of flow at all locations of theplane, whereas the standard arrows and streamlines onlygive discrete and hard to interpret samples. The topic hasbeen studied heavily in the visualization community, arecent nonexhaustive overview [16] has 90 references. Theprogress made in this decade is substantial. The early SpotNoise technique [29] was an interesting first attempt; in1993, Cabral and Leedom introduced Line Integral Con-volution (LIC), which gave high quality renderings of 2Dfluid flow [6]. Many other variations and additions havebeen presented since then, for instance, to handle flow on
surfaces and in volumes and also to boost the performance,
using software or hardware acceleration [16]. Nowadays,high quality 2D texture images of flow fields can easily be
generated on standard hardware at 50 or more frames per
second (Fig. 4, [30]). This seems a success story, but, on theother hand, these methods are not integrated in commercial
software, users of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) are
typically completely unaware of their existence, let alonethat they routinely use them to solve their problems. Here, Iuse texture-based flow visualization because I am most
familiar with it, but, for other classes of methods, such as
topology-based flow visualization and feature-based flowvisualization, similar patterns seem to apply.
How can we explain this? Let us consider the parameters
of the cost model. The number of users nis not too great.
CFD is vital for some areas, but there are few cases whereCFD is routinely used for screening, compared to, for
instance, medical applications. The frequency of use mis
also not very high. Often, CFD-users spend much time ondefining the model, simulations can also take a long time.
By then, they are very familiar with their models (high K
0).
For the analysis of the results, many alternative options areavailable, including composite quantities (such as lift of an
airfoil) and straightforward cross-sections and arrow plots,
with low costs. The use of texture-based visualization incursat least a high value for C
u(see Section 4.3). The additional
/C1Kthat texture-based visualization offers is unclear.
Laidlaw et al. [15] have compared different vector visuali-
zation methods. LIC turned out to yield better results forcritical point detection, but worse results for other aspects,
such as estimation of the angle of the flow. Also, standard
LIC does not give the sign of the direction of the flow.Hence, we can have doubts about the value of /C1K. And,
finally, it is not clear what the real value is of this /C1K, in the
sense that better visualization leads to better decisions. Atleast, so far, there does not seem to be such a strong need for
better visualization methods in the CFD community that
they have attempted to integrate these methods into theirpackages.
5.2 Cushion Treemaps
Also, in the early 1990s, Johnson and Shneidermanintroduced the concept of a treemap [11] to visualize largehierarchical data sets. The base algorithm is straightfor-
ward: A rectangle is recursively subdivided according to
the hierarchical data in such a way that the size of each426 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 12, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2006
Fig. 4. Image-based flow visualization [30]. Nice visual effects, but rarely
used in practice.
rectangle corresponds to the size of each leaf element. In the
late 1990s, we proposed using hierarchical cushions to showthe underlying hierarchical structure more clearly [32]. Wepackaged this technique in SequoiaView in 2000 [1], a toolfor the visualization of the contents of a hard disk (Fig. 5),and made this publicly available as freeware. Since then,SequoiaView has been downloaded over 500,000 times fromour site. Also, it has been distributed three times via CDwith the German computer magazine C
0t. This is an
example of how visualization has reached an audience.
The economic model helps to explain this result. First,
the number of (potential) users is very large, in principle
equal to the number of PC users. Typically, such a tool isused several times per year, which is not very high, but notnegligible. Alternative solutions for this problem are scarce
(SpaceMonger, also using treemaps, is an example) and
getting an overview of a hard disk is hard using WindowsExplorer.
Information can be derived fairly easily from the visuali-
zation. It is easy to spot large files, large directories, and large
collections of files. Furthermore, this information is directlyvaluable to the user: The tool can help (and many users haveconfirmed this) to delay buying a new hard disk. The action isclear here: removal of files. We offer an option to start up
Windows Explorer from SequoiaView to remove files
manually. The initial costs per user are low: The tool itself isfreeware, it only has to be downloaded and installed. Thecosts per use case are minimal as well. By default, the tool
starts to collect data from the last folder specified and an
image is shown automatically. Exploration is easy: Extrainformation per file can be obtained by hovering the pointerover the rectangles.
In summary, Fis high in this case. We would like to
think that this is a result of our visualization method,however, the main reasons are probably that our tool meetsa real need of real users and that the costs, in all respects,are minimal.
5.3 Presentation versus Exploration
Next, we consider a more general case. The main use casesfor visualization are exploration (where users do not knowwhat is in the data) and presentation (where some result hasto be communicated to others). It is hard to quantify this,but my impression is that many researchers in visualization
consider exploration as the major raison d’etre for visuali-
zation, whereas presentation is considered as something
additional and not too serious. However, from my own
experience, presentation is at least as important as explora-
tion. Many users find videos and images attractive forpresenting their work at conferences; the popularity of
visualization tools and demos often rises sharply just before
open days. For years, I had a pleasant and fruitful
cooperation with Flomerics Ltd. in the United Kingdom.
This company develops CFD-based tools for, among others,
thermal assessment for the electronics industry. My major
contact there was the marketing manager, who could usevisualization to show the benefits of the CFD tools to
managers.
In a broader sense, we can view visualization every-
where. Commercial television uses visualization to show
the chemical miracles of new cosmetics, the ingenuity of
vacuum-cleaners, and why a new fitness device does not
harm your back. Obviously, such visualizations are not the
result of visualizing data, but rather the result of the fantasy
of advertisement agencies. Selling stuff is not only the realm
of business, but also of science itself. Once I heard someone
state: The purpose of visualization is funding, not insight .W e
can explain the value of visualization for presentation withthe cost model. If we consider the viewers of such
visualizations as the users, we see that nis high; K
0is
low (the viewers know little about the topic, so much can be
gained); the action to be taken is clear (buy a product, fund
research) and has direct economic consequences; the costs
for the viewers are low (they just have to view the
visualization), although they can be high for the presenter.And, furthermore, for presentation purposes, there are
almost no alternative or competing techniques. Pure facts
(product X saves Y percent of time) can be convincing, but,
to make plausible why and also to show that this is all
scientifically sound, visualization is the way to go.
6V ISUALIZATION AS INNOVATION
In the preceding sections, a number of questions wereraised and various disturbing statements were made. There
are many objections that can be made and, in the following
sections, some of them are given. One important distinctionis which viewpoint to use. Besides a purely technological
and economical viewpoint, we can also consider our field as
innovation, art, design, or as science. Associated with these
are a number of questions, but also routes for future work.
In the cost model, visualization is considered as a
technology, to be measured for utility. In this context,
research in visualization should lead to new solutions that
are useful in practice. Not all the work done is successful in
this respect, but we can find a number of reasons to explain
this. In this section, I consider our work from an innovationpoint of view.
First of all, innovation is a merciless process, where only
a few new solutions survive. A rule of thumb in productdevelopment is that a thousand ideas lead to a hundred
prototypes, which lead to ten products, out of which just
one is successful. The visualization research community
operates at the start of this pipeline, hence it should come asVAN WIJK: VIEWS ON VISUALIZATION 427
Fig. 5. Visualization hard disk using SequoiaView [1], [32], [33], an
example of an application that has found an audience.
no surprise that not everything finds its way into industry.
We can see it as a mission to develop inspiring new ideas,
which are a primary fuel in the innovation process.
However, creativity consists of two parts: creation of
new ideas as well as selection of the best ones. The first taskis fulfilled properly by the visualization community, thesecond is not. The number of careful validations ofvisualization methods is still low, although this seems to
be improving in the last years.
Second, innovation is a long chain. Eick states [8] that an
emerging discipline progresses through four stages: first as a
craft practiced by skilled artisans, followed by researchersformulating scientific principles and theories, which arerefined by engineers to determine production rules, and,finally, the technology becomes widely available. According
t oE i c k ,w eh a v ej u s te n t e r e dt h es e c o n dp h a s e .A l s o ,
developing new methods is quite different from turningthese into products and marketing them. There is a gapbetween our prospective users and the research community.Neither have the proper stimuli to bridge this gap: Individual
researchers are too busy increasing the number of publica-
tions they are judged on and, for the end-users, implementingnew methods is far too costly. The gap can be filled in differentways. One way is via commercial companies (spin-offcompanies or companies that integrate visualization in their
simulation packages), an alternative is via open source and
academic development and maintenance, funded by govern-ment agencies. VMD [2] is an example of the latter category.As a corollary, if we think that visualization is useful and thatthis gap causes the lack of adoption, we should aim at
increasing funding for more practical activities. Or, we
should start companies.
Third, one could state that this is all a matter of time.It takes time before new ideas penetrate, before new
users become aware of new methods, before initiatives aretaken to integrate new methods into existing systems. Thismight be true in some cases, however, it is also too easy touse this as an excuse. It could be used for any method,
hence it does not help us to distinguish between good and
bad ones.
Fourth, the focus in the model is on large numbers of
users and use cases. One can also consider cases where thenumber of users is small, but where the value of the result isvery large. In the books of Tufte, some great cases are
presented, such as Snow’s discovery of the cause of a
cholera epidemic in 1854 [26]. Are there recent cases for newvisualization methods? Cases that enabled the researcher toobtain a major scientific insight, to save many lives, or tosolve a crucial technological problem? One would like to
read more case studies in this spirit that show that
visualization is worthwhile and can make a difference.
Finally, one defense is that maybe we are not doing bad
at all. A large amount of technology is available and parts ofit are routinely used. Also, many disciplines (for instance,mathematics) often do not care about practical usability atall; for some computer science fields that do claim to have
practical relevance, it is also sometimes hard to see the
adoption in practice. Why should we bother? This notion isexplored further in the next section.7T HEART OF VISUALIZATION
One could claim that visualization has value in its own right
and for its own purposes. One part of this is in the results:Some of the images we produce have a clear aesthetic value.But, the art of visualization can also be found in the ideas,
methods, and techniques developed. We can consider
ourselves as a group of puzzle solvers and the challengeis to develop new, simple, and elegant solutions, whichprovide us all with intellectual and aesthetic satisfaction.
This is not a line of defense that can help us to convince
our prospective users and sponsors. Nevertheless, I do want
to mention it because it can give a powerful thrust (and,obviously, also because the results of this will possibly findapplications in the real world). In the early 1990s, I workedhard on using texture for visualization—not to satisfy users,
but simply because the puzzle was tough, challenging, and
hard to crack. The work of our student Ernst Kleiberg onbotanically inspired tree visualization (Fig. 6, [13]) was notdriven by user requests, but just an experiment to find out if
it could be done at all. At the Information Visualization
Symposium in 2004, we got two messages back. AlfredKobsa found the usability limited, compared to othermethods [14]; on the other hand, Stuart Card showed this
image in his keynote speech as an example of a nice
visualization. Is this a good visualization or not?
Finally, in my own work, I found aesthetic criteria for
new methods to be effective guides. Sometimes, each link ofthe chain from idea, mathema tical model, algorithm,
implementation, to visual result is clean, simple, elegant,
symmetric, etc. It is amazing how much effort is required toreach this. Developing great ideas is simple, rejection of badideas takes all the time.
8D ESIGN AND VISUALIZATION
Visualization methods, techniques, and systems have to bedeveloped. I was trained (a long time ago) as an industrial428 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 12, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2006
Fig. 6. Botanic visualization contents of a hard disk [13], [33]. Useful or
just a nice picture?
designer and, in my opinion, our field can take advantage of
insights from design in general and visual design in
particular.
I studied industrial design engineering at the Delft
University of Technology. The aim of this educational
program was not to produce industrial designers per se, but
rather managers who can overview the product develop-ment process and can communicate with all specialists
involved. Hence, the curriculum consists of a wide variety
of topics, including human factors, mechanical engineering,business science, and graphic design. Also, product design
itself fills a large part. I was not talented enough to become
a industrial designer myself, but, nevertheless, I havelearned much that can be applied in many fields, including
visualization.
Besides research, I have developed, alone or in a team,
many systems for pre and postprocessing technical applica-tions, especially when I was employed at The Netherlands
Energy Research Foundation. I find developing applications
for real users with real problems highly rewarding andoften just as challenging and difficult as doing research. For
some time, I considered such tasks as completely different
from research. The primary aims in practical visualizationare a useful tool and a satisfied user; the focus in research is
on novelty and on publications. However, looking back, I
realize that practical jobs have led to new researchquestions, whereas, now and then, I could insert findings
from research into practical systems.
In my present position, among computer scientists, I am
often surprised about the view taken on design. The rigidwaterfall model is often still dominant and colleagues and
students often do not seem to be aware of basic methodo-
logical issues and approaches that are commonplace inproduct design [22]. Hence, I take the opportunity here to
communicate and discuss a few of these in short.
The basic design cycle has the following ingredients. First,
set up requirements; second, invent a number of solutions;and, finally, match the solutions against the requirements and
select the best one. This seems quite obvious; however, I often
encounter reports and theses where these basic steps cannotbe identified. Just documenting the final result is not enough
to understand why it is a solution to a problem. Let us
consider each step in more detail.
In the ideal case, requirements should be complete,
discriminative, objective, and measurable. This is difficult to
achieve in practice, but, nevertheless, should be attempted.
Thinking about measurable requirements (rather than ”Toolshould give insight”) leads to a better understanding of the
problem and task at hand. If a fuzzy requirement cannot be
turned into something measurable: Keep it on the list as areminder of something important. Sometimes, people
consider writing down requirements just as a pure writing
exercise. A more positive attitude is to consider it as acreative act in itself. Defining requirements comes down to
creating a solution space. Care should be taken that the
requirements are not too constraining or too open ended.Requirements vary in importance, weights and priorities
should be assigned to them. Requirements are often
conflicting. For instance, a tool should be easy to use andalso have many features. This is important; it helps us to
identify the real challenges and problems.
Generating multiple solutions is important, but often not
that difficult. Most important here is the awareness that the
first solution thought of is not necessarily the best. Again,
trivial and existing solutions should not be forgotten, just
like wild and exciting ideas. Simple methods can be used to
increase the number of solutions, for instance, combine
solutions, use metaphors, identify aspects, and enumerate
solutions. Take a large sheet of paper and do not stop until
it is full, scribbled with ideas and partial solutions. Accept
that others can have good ideas as well. Postponeevaluation. Do not hesitate to write down solutions that
are perfect in one respect, but fail on others.
In the last step of the basic design cycle, the best solution is
sought. One often-used approach is to put all requirements
and solutions in a matrix, put a score in each cell, and calculate
a (weighted) score. This gives a first insight into the value of
the potential solutions. Often, the outcome is not what is
wanted; for instance, one boring solution survives, while a
solution that has much more appeal fails for one requirement.
Note that the basic design cycle is already iterative. Feel free to
add, remove, or reformulate requirements. If “solution
should be appealing” is important for the intended audience
(or for motivation of the development team), write that down,
thereby making it explicit and open for discussion. Also,
careful inspection of the table can lead to new solutions.
Often, combinations of the good parts of different solutions
fulfill the requirements best.
The design process itself should be top-down and cyclic.
The basic design cycle is gone through first on a high level.
In the first intake conversation, discuss the problem at
hand, get a feeling of the scale of the data, the questions
asked, and find out which solutions have been tried already
and why they do not satisfy the needs. Next, developsketchy, global, and rough solutions which require many
details to be filled in. Each of these details leads to a new
design cycle, which, in turn, again leads to new solutions
and in even finer details to be worked out. Also,
refinements can lead to new insights such that earlier
decisions have to be changed. This is natural and it is better
to recognize this situation as early as possible and to take
adequate action than to drag a dead horse. Furthermore, it
is important that, in each overall iteration, all relevant
aspects are addressed and are given the right amount of
attention and resources. Premature optimization is the root of
all evil [5], not only in software development, but also often
in design in general.
Visualization can be considered as a human-computer
interface design task. Methodologies from the HCI field
should be adopted. Continuous involvement of end-users
should be sought. Mock-ups and prototypes should be used
as early as possible. Often, the hard question is what the
users really need and want. The prospective users often
cannot make this explicit (or they can only state it in terms
of something they know), but they can comment on
something that they can see and touch themselves. Enjoy
criticism on your brilliant ideas; this guides you in the rightdirection.VAN WIJK: VIEWS ON VISUALIZATION 429
8.1 Visual Design
The previous statements on design are very general and
broad and, in my opinion, they apply to most, if not all,
design problems. Even broader, they can be applied to all
decision processes, ranging from buying a new car to
definition of a strategy for a department. Also, they apply to
visual design.
In my observation, our community has a somewhat
uneasy relationship with visual design. On one hand, there
is an overall recognition that visual design is very important
for our field. When we design a visualization or an interface,
we have to decide on shapes, colors, labels, etc. We invite
great graphic designers, like Edward Tufte or Nigel Holmes,to our conferences, hear their inspiring talks breathlessly,
and, on the work floor, we decide that visual design is the
expertise of gods from a different planet and continue to
produce visual junk. Maybe I am exaggerating, but, for
instance, a quick scan over the posters presented at
Visualization 2005 show that often very interesting work is
presented in an amateurish and messy way. David Laidlaw
has stated the importance of visual design and visual design
education on many panels and I strongly support him in this.
There are many misconceptions on visual design. Some
of these are:
Design is a matter of talent . Indeed, some people are
extremely gifted and produce breathtaking designs. But, on
the other hand, designing is a human activity like many
others, such as writing, walking, and programming. Every-
body has a ceiling, few become great experts, but, by
practicing, many can perform reasonably well. For visual
design, the law of diminishing returns works in an
advantageous way. Because only few in our field have
received training in this, there is much that can be learned
in a reasonably short time.
Design is a matter of creativity . Generation of alternatives
is often not that difficult. Suppose, for instance, we have to
decide on a background color or the position of a label: The
alternatives can easily be generated. It is much harder to
decide which choice is optimal. Real creativity implies
thinking out of the box and rejecting some convention that
everybody has taken for granted. But, in many cases, justfollowing conventions is good enough for an effective
design.
Design is a matter of inspiration . Often, design is just a
matter of hard work. Good ideas often do not come out of
the blue, they arrive when the problem at hand has beenstudied carefully and when much effort has been spent on
the generation and evaluation of alternatives.
Design is about aesthetics . Visual design is often purely
functional. The main concern is communication: Is the
message conveyed to the audience in the way intended?
Readability and the attraction of the proper amount of
attention to the right elements are the issues at stake. When
these issues are addressed in a proper way, often an
attractive design will result.
Design is a matter of taste . This is maybe the most
important misconception: Designers are supposed to create
something just because they like it that way and that’s
where the discussion stops. However, visual design is much
more rational than that. Professionals make consciousdecisions all the time and they can rationalize why they
have done something. Training helps here. When profes-
sional designers review a design, they will, for each aspect,
ask the reason why a decision was taken and they will not
accept “no answer” or just that this is a matter of taste. I
have gone through this experience many times. It ishumiliating at first, but it does help to raise awareness
and make conscious decisions.
Obviously, only a few of us have the real talent to
become experts and, for critical visualization applications,
the input of professional visual designers cannot be
replaced. Nevertheless, there is much that can be gained
for us as amateurs and developing insight and skill does
help to improve visualizations and interfaces. Reading
about design helps; a great introduction, with many visual
examples, is Liddel’s recent text [17]. Also, analyzing
designs is helpful, not only the highlights (such as Beck’s
1933 London Tube map), but also day-to-day material, such
as magazines, brochures, and books. One can try to see the
structure and decisions taken. And, above all, practicing isimportant, preferably guided by an expert.
Finally, as a comparison, let’s consider writing papers.
This skill is important for any academic. The aim is not to
produce great fiction, but to communicate results clearly. It
is difficult and requires hard work and much practice.
Everybody will remember when he or she received his very
first draft for a paper back from his supervisor, with strong
comments in red all over the pages. Often, lengthy
discussions and many iterations are needed before the
structure and contents are optimal. Now, my statement is
that, for visual design, almost exactly the same patterns
apply, in contrast to what many in the field believe.
9S CIENCE
Apart from considering visualization as a technology,
innovation, an art for its own sake, or as design, we could
consider visualization research as a scientific discipline. If
there is something like a science of visualization, with what
should it be concerned? Loosely defined, a scientific
discipline should aim at a coherent set of theories, laws,
and models that describe a range of phenomena, have
predictive power, are grounded in observations, and that
can be falsified.
If we look at the field now, many algorithms and
techniques have been developed, but there are few generic
concepts and theories. One reason for the lack of funda-mental theories is that visualization is intrinsically complex,
has many aspects, and can be approached from different
perspectives. In terms of the model proposed, visualization
can be observed from the point of view of the data Dto be
visualized, the various solutions proposed ( SandV), from
the/C1Kaimed at, i.e., the task, purpose or discipline for
which it is applied, the images Ithemselves, or from
aspects such as perception Por exploration E. Also,
developing good visualization solutions is intrinsically adesign problem and closed form solutions for the optima-
lization problem “Given DfindVsuch that /C1Kis optimal”
cannot be expected.
Nevertheless, we could and should aim at more generic
insights, at several levels. First of all, a descriptive approach430 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 12, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2006
can be pursued further. Methods are analyzed and
categorized, leading to taxonomies that show how they
relate to and differ from each other. Such taxonomies span
the current solution space and can lead to insight as towhere new opportunities can be found. Some examples of
good overviews are [37], [9], [16], a great example of a
taxonomy is given in [4], where a variety of differentmarching cube style algorithms are brought under oneumbrella using computational group theory.
Even if it were only because the field is still developing
and overviews are quickly outdated, more work in this area
should be encouraged. Taxonomies need not be confined to
methods, also taxonomies on different kinds of data andespecially on different types of knowledge that are relevantfor end users are useful. Duke et al. [7] give strong
arguments for more efforts in this area. Development of
an ontology of visualization (as a next level abovetaxonomy and terminology) gives a more rigorous founda-tion of the field and is beneficial for collaboration,
composition, preservation, and education.
Second, evaluation and validation are important. Assess-
ment of the effectiveness and efficiency of differentmethods and techniques is vital from a technological pointof view (which method to use), but also as a base for more
generic statements on visualization. A science of visualiza-
tion should be empirical, in the sense that concretemeasurements of the phenomena studied are done, which,in our case, concern people making and watching images
that depict data. Tory and Mo ¨ller [25] give a good overview
of the current status of the use of human factors research invisualization and identify areas for future research.
Third, in line with the previous, we should ultimately
aim at generic results (models, laws) that enable us to
understand what goes on and to predict why certain
approaches do or do not work. In the end, explanationsshould be based on properties of the environment ofvisualization, especially the end users. The value of
visualization is ultimately determined by their perceptual
abilities, their knowledge on the data shown, the value theyassign to various insights, and the costs they are willing tospend.
A great example of such a generic result is Ware’s
statement that a 2 1/2 D attitude toward the design ofvisualization should be adopted [35], with the strongargument that our human visual system is also 2 1/2 D.Ware’s book on Information Visualization [36] is a richsource of insights on perception and how these can be usedto improve visualization, Tufte gives many useful guide-lines and recommendations in his books [28], [26], [27].However, many of these are not quantitative and, also, donot explain how to handle conflicting requirements. Oneoperational and practical criterium for guidelines is that
they should allow for automated implementation such that
the user gets a good, if not optimal view on the data withoutcosts. The early work of Mackinlay [19] on automatedgeneration of visualizations is great in this respect, and it issurprising that the state of the art in this area does not seemto have advanced much further since then.
Finally, methodological issues have to be studied further.
This concerns questions such as how to design visualiza-tions and how to measure and evaluate the effectiveness ofvarious solutions. And, also, how to assess the value of
visualization in general.
10 C ONCLUSION
In the preceding sections, I have considered visualizationfrom multiple perspectives. None of these is superior. Oneview is to consider visualization purely from a technologi-cal point of view, aiming for effectiveness and efficiency.This requires that costs and benefits be assessed. The simplemodel proposed enables us to get insight into variousaspects of visualization and also to understand why certainclasses of methods are successful and others are not.Another view is to consider visualization as an art, i.e.,something that is interesting enough for its own sake. Theuse of insights from design can help us to improvevisualizations. Finally, a view on visualization as an empiric
science was discussed.
Obviously, these different views, schematically depicted
in Fig. 7, are strongly related and results from one view can
stimulate work according to the other views. Finally, eachview that is adopted does imply playing a different game,and, if we want to win, we should play those gamesaccording to their own rules: aim for provable effectivenessand efficiency, aim for elegance and beauty, and aim atgeneric laws with predictive power.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many colleagues, including the anonymous reviewers, havegiven constructive feedback on earlier versions of thispaper; their insights have helped me to add new points ofview. Also, their positive support shows that there is roomfor critical reflection, which is a strong signal that our fieldis healthy and vital. I thank Hannes Pretorius for proof-
reading and giving valuable advice on improving the
readability of this version.
REFERENCES
[1] www.win.tue.nl/sequoiaview, 2006.
[2] www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd, 2006.
[3] Position Papers NIH/NSF Proc. Fall 2004 Workshop Visualization
Research Challenges, 2004, visual.nlm.nih.gov/evc/meetings/
vrc2004.
[4] D.C. Banks and S. Linton, “Counting Cases in Marching Cubes:
Toward a Generic Algorithm for Producing Substitopes,” Proc.
IEEE Conf. Visualization, pp. 51-58, 2003.
[5] J. Bentley, Writing Efficient Programs. Prentice Hall, 1982.
[6] B. Cabral and L.C. Leedom, “Imaging Vector Fields Using Line
Integral Convolution,” Computer Graphics, vol. 27, pp. 263-270,
1993.
[7] D.J. Duke, K.W. Brodlie, D.A. Duce, and I. Herman, “Do You See
What I Mean?” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, vol. 25,
no. 3, May/June 2005.
[8] S.G. Eick, “Information Visualization at 10,” IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 12-14, Jan./Feb. 2005.VAN WIJK: VIEWS ON VISUALIZATION 431
Fig. 7. Views on visualization.
[9] I. Herman, G. Melanc ¸on, and M.S. Marshall, “Graph Visualization
in Information Visualization: A Survey,” IEEE Trans. Visualization
and Computer Graphics, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 24-44, Jan./Mar. 2000.
[10] B. Hibbard, “Top Ten Visualization Problems,” PSIGGRAPH
Computer Graphics Newsletter, vol. 33, no. 2, 1999.
[11] B. Johnson and B. Shneiderman, “Treemaps: A Space-Filling
Approach to the Visualization of Hierarchical InformationStructures,” Proc. IEEE Conf. Visualization ’91, pp. 284-291, 1991.
[12] C. Johnson, “Top Scientific Visualization Research Problems,”
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 13-17,
July/Aug. 2004.
[13] E. Kleiberg, H. van de Wetering, and J.J. van Wijk, “Botanical
Visualization of Huge Hierarchies,” Proc. IEEE Symp. Information
Visualization (InfoVis ’01), pp. 87-94, 2001.
[14] A. Kobsa, “User Experiments with Tree Visualization Systems,”
Proc. IEEE Symp. Information Visualization (InfoVis ’04), pp. 9-16,
2004.
[15] D.H. Laidlaw, R.M. Kirby, J.S. Davidson, T.S. Miller, M. da Silva,
W.H. Warren, and M.J. Tarr, “Quantitative Comparative Evalua-tion of 2D Vector Field Visualization Methods,” Proc. IEEE Conf.
Visualization ’01, pp. 143-150, 2001.
[16] R.S. Laramee, H. Hauser, H. Doleisch, B. Vrolijk, F.H. Post, and D.
Weiskopf, “The State of the Art in Flow Visualization: Dense andTexture-Based Techniques,” Proc. Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 23,
no. 2, pp. 203-221, 2004.
[17] W. Lidwell, K. Holden, and J. Butler, Universal Principles of Design.
Rockport Publishers, 2003.
[18] B. Lorensen, “On the Death of Visualization,” Position Papers NIH/
NSF Proc. Fall 2004 Workshop Visualization Research Challenges,2004.
[19] J.D. Mackinlay, “Automating the Design of Graphical Presenta-
tions of Relational Information,” ACM Trans. Graphics, vol. 5, no. 2,
pp. 110-141, 1986.
[20] Visualization in Sci entific Computing, B.H. McCormick, T.A.
DeFanti, and M.D. Brown, eds., New York: ACM SIGGRAPH,1987.
[21] T.-M. Rhyne, B. Hibbard, C. Johnson, C. Chen, and S. Eick, “Can
We Determine the Top Unresolved Problems of Visualization?,”Proc. IEEE Conf. Visualization ’04, pp. 563-565, 2004.
[22] N.J.M. Roozenburg and J. Eekels, Product Design: Fundamentals and
Methods. Wiley, 1995.
[23] B. Shneiderman, comment during session at InfoVis, 2004.
[24] Illuminating the Path: Research and Development Agenda for Visual
Analytics, J.J. Thomas and K.A. Cook, eds., IEEE, 2005.
[25] M. Tory and T. Mo ¨ller, “Human Factors in Visualization
Research,” IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer Graphics,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 72-84, Jan./Feb. 2004.
[26] E.R. Tufte, Envisioning Information. Graphics Press, 1990.
[27] E.R. Tufte, Visual Explanations: Images and Quantities, Evidence and
Narrative. Graphics Press, 1997.
[28] E.R. Tufte, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information, second ed.
Graphics Press, 2001.
[29]
J.J. van Wijk, “Spot Noise: Texture Synthesis for Data Visualiza-
tion,” Computer Graphics, vol. 25, pp. 309-318, 1991.
[30] J.J. van Wijk, “Image Based Flow Visualization,” ACM Trans.
Graphics, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 745-754, 2002.
[31] J.J. van Wijk, “The Value of Visualization,” Proc. IEEE Conf.
Visualization ’05, pp. 79-86, 2005.
[32] J.J. van Wijk and H. van de Wetering, “Cushion Treemaps,” Proc.
1999 IEEE Symp. Information Visualization (InfoVis ’99), pp. 73-78,
1999.
[33] J.J. van Wijk, F. van Ham, and H.M.M. van de Wetering,
“Rendering Hierarchical Data,” Comm. ACM, vol. 46, no. 9,
pp. 257-263, Sept. 2003.
[34] J.J. van Wijk and E. van Selow, “Cluster and Calendar-Based
Visualization of Time Series Data,” Proc. 1999 IEEE Symp.
Information Visualization (InfoVis ’99), pp. 4-9, 1999.
[35] C. Ware, “Designing with a 2 1/2D Attitude,” Information Design J.,
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 255-262, 2001.
[36] C. Ware, Information Visualization: Perception for Design, second ed.
Morgan Kaufman, 2004.
[37] P.C. Wong and R.D. Bergeron, “30 Years of Multidimensional
Multivariate Visualization,” Scientific Visualization—Overviews,
Methodologies, and Techniques, G.M. Nielson, H.H. Hagen, and
H. Mueller, eds., IEEE CS Press, 1997.Jarke J. van Wijk received the MSc degree in
industrial design engineering in 1982 and thePhD degree in computer science in 1986, bothwith honors. He worked at a software companyand at The Netherlands Energy Research
Foundation ECN before he joined the Tech-
nische Universiteit Eindhoven in 1998, where hebecame a full professor of visualization in 2001.He is a member of the IEEE, ACM SIGGRAPH,and Eurographics. He was paper cochair for
IEEE Visualization in 2003 and 2004 and is paper cochair for IEEE
InfoVis in 2006. His main research interests are information visualization
and flow visualization, both with a focus on the development of newvisual representations.
.For more information on this or any other computing topic,
please visit our Digital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.432 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 12, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2006
