Donald Trump

Donald Trump Tweet collection

Donald John Trump (born June 14, 1946) is the 45th President of the United States. Before entering politics, he was a businessman, specializing on real estate and branding, and was successful with several TV shows, including as executive producer and host of a reality show.

Link: https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump

Links to an external site.

Copy from here:



The journey to #MAGA began CPAC 2011 and the opportunity to reconnect with friends and supporters is something I look forward to every year. See you at #CPAC2018!

Thank you to Sue Kruczek who lost her wonderful and talented son Nick to the Opioid scourge for your kind words while on foxandfriends. We are fighting this terrible epidemic hard - Nick will not have died in vain!

This will be a big week for Infrastructure. After so stupidly spending $7 trillion in the Middle East it is now time to start investing in OUR Country!

Just spoke to JohnKasich to express condolences and prayers to all for the horrible shooting of two great police officers from WestervillePD. This is a true tragedy!

Rep. Lou Barletta a Great Republican from Pennsylvania who was one of my very earliest supporters will make a FANTASTIC Senator. He is strong ; smart loves Pennsylvania ; loves our Country! Voted for Tax Cuts unlike Bob Casey who listened to Tax Hikers Pelosi and Schumer!

4.2 million hard working Americans have already received a large Bonus and/or Pay Increase because of our recently Passed Tax Cut ; Jobs Bill....and it will only get better! We are far ahead of schedule.

So many positive things going on for the U.S.A. and the Fake News Media just doesn’t want to go there. Same negative stories over and over again! No wonder the People no longer trust the media whose approval ratings are correctly at their lowest levels in history!    #MAGA

My Administration has identified three major priorities for creating a safe modern and lawful immigration system: fully securing the border ending chain migration and canceling the visa lottery. Congress must secure the immigration system and protect Americans.

My thoughts and prayers are with the two police officers their families and everybody at the WestervillePD

Republicans want to fix DACA far more than the Democrats do. The Dems had all three branches of government back in 2008-2011 and they decided not to do anything about DACA. They only want to use it as a campaign issue. Vote Republican!

....agencies not just the FBI ; DOJ now the State Department to dig up dirt on him in the days leading up to the Election. Comey had conversations with Donald Trump which I don’t believe were accurate...he leaked information (corrupt).” Tom Fitton of Judicial Watch on FoxNews

“My view is that not only has Trump been vindicated in the last several weeks about the mishandling of the Dossier and the lies about the Clinton/DNC Dossier it shows that he’s been victimized. He’s been victimized by the Obama Administration who were using all sorts of.......

Peoples lives are being shattered and destroyed by a mere allegation. Some are true and some are false. Some are old and some are new. There is no recovery for someone falsely accused - life and career are gone. Is there no such thing any longer as Due Process?

According to the nytimes a Russian sold phony secrets on “Trump” to the U.S. Asking price was $10 million brought down to $1 million to be paid over time. I hope people are now seeing ; understanding what is going on here. It is all now starting to come out - DRAIN THE SWAMP!

The Democrats sent a very political and long response memo which they knew because of sources and methods (and more) would have to be heavily redacted whereupon they would blame the White House for lack of transparency. Told them to re-do and send back in proper form!

Jobless claims have dropped to a 45 year low!

Costs on non-military lines will never come down if we do not elect more Republicans in the 2018 Election and beyond. This Bill is a BIG VICTORY for our Military but much waste in order to get Dem votes. Fortunately DACA not included in this Bill negotiations to start now!

Without more Republicans in Congress we were forced to increase spending on things we do not like or want in order to finally after many years of depletion take care of our Military. Sadly we needed some Dem votes for passage. Must elect more Republicans in 2018 Election!

Just signed Bill. Our Military will now be stronger than ever before. We love and need our Military and gave them everything — and more. First time this has happened in a long time. Also means JOBS JOBS JOBS!

Wow! -Senator Mark Warner got caught having extensive contact with a lobbyist for a Russian oligarch. Warner did not want a “paper trail” on a “private” meeting (in London) he requested with Steele of fraudulent Dossier fame. All tied into Crooked Hillary.

Time to end the visa lottery. Congress must secure the immigration system and protect Americans.

As long as we open our eyes to God’s grace - and open our hearts to God’s love - then America will forever be the land of the free the home of the brave and a light unto all nations. #NationalPrayerBreakfast

I will be meeting with Henry Kissinger at 1:45pm. Will be discussing North Korea China and the Middle East.

Our founders invoked our Creator four times in the Declaration of Independence. Our currency declares “IN GOD WE TRUST.” And we place our hands on our hearts as we recite the Pledge of Allegiance and proclaim that we are “One Nation Under God.” #NationalPrayerBreakfast

Will be heading over shortly to make remarks at The National Prayer Breakfast in Washington. Great religious and political leaders and many friends including T.V. producer Mark Burnett of our wonderful 14 season Apprentice triumph will be there. Looking forward to seeing all!

The Budget Agreement today is so important for our great Military. It ends the dangerous sequester and gives Secretary Mattis what he needs to keep America Great. Republicans and Democrats must support our troops and support this Bill!

Congratulations to the Republic of Korea on what will be a MAGNIFICENT Winter Olympics! What the South Korean people have built is truly an inspiration!

Best wishes to the Republic of Korea on hosting the Olympics! What a wonderful opportunity to show everyone that you are a truly GREAT NATION!

NEW FBI TEXTS ARE BOMBSHELLS!

In the “old days” when good news was reported the Stock Market would go up. Today when good news is reported the Stock Market goes down. Big mistake and we have so much good (great) news about the economy!

Congratulations ElonMusk and SpaceX on the successful #FalconHeavy launch. This achievement along with NASA’s commercial and international partners continues to show American ingenuity at its best!

HAPPY BIRTHDAY to our 40th President of the United States of America Ronald Reagan!

Today we heard the experiences of law enforcement professionals and community leaders working to combat the threat of MS-13 and the reforms we need from Congress to defeat it.

We need a 21st century MERIT-BASED immigration system.  Chain migration and the visa lottery are outdated programs that hurt our economic and national security.

Polling shows nearly 7 in 10 Americans support an immigration reform package that includes DACA fully secures the border ends chain migration ; cancels the visa lottery. If D’s oppose this deal they aren’t serious about DACA-they just want open borders.

My prayers and best wishes are with the family of Edwin Jackson a wonderful young man whose life was so senselessly taken. Colts

So disgraceful that a person illegally in our country killed Colts linebacker Edwin Jackson. This is just one of many such preventable tragedies. We must get the Dems to get tough on the Border and with illegal immigration FAST!

Thanks to the historic TAX CUTS that I signed into law your paychecks are going way UP your taxes are going way DOWN and America is once again OPEN FOR BUSINESS!

Representative Devin Nunes a man of tremendous courage and grit may someday be recognized as a Great American Hero for what he has exposed and what he has had to endure!

Any deal on DACA that does not include STRONG border security and the desperately needed WALL is a total waste of time. March 5th is rapidly approaching and the Dems seem not to care about DACA. Make a deal!

Little Adam Schiff who is desperate to run for higher office is one of the biggest liars and leakers in Washington right up there with Comey Warner Brennan and Clapper! Adam leaves closed committee hearings to illegally leak confidential information. Must be stopped!

Thank you to foxandfriends for exposing the truth. Perhaps that’s why your ratings are soooo much better than your untruthful competition!

The Democrats are pushing for Universal HealthCare while thousands of people are marching in the UK because their U system is going broke and not working. Dems want to greatly raise taxes for really bad and non-personal medical care. No thanks!

Congratulations to the Philadelphia Eagles on a great Super Bowl victory!

My thoughts and prayers are with all of the victims involved in this mornings train collision in South Carolina. Thank you to our incredible First Responders for the work they’ve done!

...a tool of anti-Trump political actors. This is unacceptable in a democracy and ought to alarm anyone who wants the FBI to be a nonpartisan enforcer of the law....The FBI wasn’t straight with Congress as it hid most of these facts from investigators.” Wall Street Journal

“The four page memo released Friday reports the disturbing fact about how the FBI and FISA appear to have been used to influence the 2016 election and its aftermath....The FBI failed to inform the FISA court that the Clinton campaign had funded the dossier....the FBI became....

Great jobs numbers and finally after many years rising wages- and nobody even talks about them. Only Russia Russia Russia despite the fact that after a year of looking there is No Collusion!

This memo totally vindicates “Trump” in probe. But the Russian Witch Hunt goes on and on. Their was no Collusion and there was no Obstruction (the word now used because after one year of looking endlessly and finding NOTHING collusion is dead). This is an American disgrace!

Rasmussen just announced that my approval rating jumped to 49% a far better number than I had in winning the Election and higher than certain “sacred cows.” Other Trump polls are way up also. So why does the media refuse to write this? Oh well someday!

Today it was my honor to join the great men and women of DHSgov CustomsBorder ICEgov and USCIS at the U.S. Customs and Border Protection National Targeting Center in Sterling Virginia. Fact sheet

“Trump the orator outlines the greatness of America to Democrats’ disgust”

The top Leadership and Investigators of the FBI and the Justice Department have politicized the sacred investigative process in favor of Democrats and against Republicans - something which would have been unthinkable just a short time ago. Rank ; File are great people!

The Democrats just aren’t calling about DACA. Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer have to get moving fast or they’ll disappoint you again. We have a great chance to make a deal or blame the Dems! March 5th is coming up fast.

Why would smart voters want to put Democrats in Congress in 2018 Election when their policies will totally kill the great wealth created during the months since the Election. People are much better off now not to mention ISIS VA Judges Strong Border 2nd A Tax Cuts ; more?

If the Dems (Crooked Hillary) got elected your stocks would be down 50% from values on Election Day. Now they have a great future - and just beginning!

Big protests in Iran. The people are finally getting wise as to how their money and wealth is being stolen and squandered on terrorism. Looks like they will not take it any longer. The USA is watching very closely for human rights violations!

“Trump Rally: Stocks put 2017 in the record books”

Jobs are kicking in and companies are coming back to the U.S. Unnecessary regulations and high taxes are being dramatically Cut and it will only get better. MUCH MORE TO COME!

I use Social Media not because I like to but because it is the only way to fight a VERY dishonest and unfair “press” now often referred to as Fake News Media. Phony and non-existent “sources” are being used more often than ever. Many stories ; reports a pure fiction!

On Taxes: “This is the biggest corporate rate cut ever going back to the corporate income tax rate of roughly 80 years ago.This is a huge pro-growth stimulus for the economy. Every year the Obama WH overstated how the economy would grow. Now real economics and jobs.” WSJ Report

Oppressive regimes cannot endure forever and the day will come when the Iranian people will face a choice. The world is watching!

The entire world understands that the good people of Iran want change and other than the vast military power of the United States that Iran’s people are what their leaders fear the most....

Many reports of peaceful protests by Iranian citizens fed up with regime’s corruption ; its squandering of the nation’s wealth to fund terrorism abroad. Iranian govt should respect their people’s rights including right to express themselves. The world is watching! #IranProtests

The Democrats have been told and fully understand that there can be no DACA without the desperately needed WALL at the Southern Border and an END to the horrible Chain Migration ; ridiculous Lottery System of Immigration etc. We must protect our Country at all cost!

Why is the United States Post Office which is losing many billions of dollars a year while charging Amazon and others so little to deliver their packages making Amazon richer and the Post Office dumber and poorer? Should be charging MUCH MORE!

RT charliekirk11: Incredible video: CBS does a special on the GOP tax plan The result?Every middle class family they sat down with SA…

RT charliekirk11: ISIS getting slaughtered: Square miles liberated from ISISTrump: 26000 --  Obama: 13200Total Square miles held by…

RT FoxBusiness: .charliekirk11: "What this president has done is truly historic and if a Democrat president achieved 1/10th of what POT…

RT charliekirk11: 3 big wins in 2017 you won't hear:Trump confirmed the most circuit court judges ever in a President's 1st year (all co…

While the Fake News loves to talk about my so-called low approval rating foxandfriends just showed that my rating on Dec. 28 2017 was approximately the same as President Obama on Dec. 28 2009 which was 47%...and this despite massive negative Trump coverage ; Russia hoax!

In the East it could be the COLDEST New Year’s Eve on record. Perhaps we could use a little bit of that good old Global Warming that our Country but not other countries was going to pay TRILLIONS OF DOLLARS to protect against. Bundle up!

Together we are MAKING AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!

I've been saying it for a long long time. #NoKo Caught RED HANDED - very disappointed that China is allowing oil to go into North Korea. There will never be a friendly solution to the North Korea problem if this continues to happen!

Retail sales are at record numbers. We’ve got the economy going better than anyone ever dreamt - and you haven’t seen anything yet!

Vanity Fair which looks like it is on its last legs is bending over backwards in apologizing for the minor hit they took at Crooked H. Anna Wintour who was all set to be Amb to Court of St James’s ; a big fundraiser for CH is beside herself in grief ; begging for forgiveness!

“Arrests of MS-13 Members Associates Up 83% Under Trump”

“On 1/20 - the day Trump was inaugurated - an estimated 35000 ISIS fighters held approx 17500 square miles of territory in both Iraq and Syria. As of 12/21 the U.S. military est the remaining 1000 or so fighters occupy roughly 1900 square miles..” jamiejmcintyre dcexaminer

Just left West Palm Beach Fire ; Rescue #2. Met with great men and women as representatives of those who do so much for all of us. Firefighters paramedics first responders - what amazing people they are!

“On 1/20 - the day Trump was inaugurated - an estimated 35000 ISIS fighters held approx 17500 square miles of territory in both Iraq and Syria. As of 12/21 the U.S. military estimates the remaining 1000 or so fighters occupy roughly 1900 square miles...” via jamiejmcintyre

All signs are that business is looking really good for next year only to be helped further by our Tax Cut Bill. Will be a great year for Companies and JOBS! Stock Market is poised for another year of SUCCESS!

WOW foxandfrlends  “Dossier is bogus. Clinton Campaign DNC funded Dossier. FBI CANNOT (after all of this time) VERIFY CLAIMS IN DOSSIER OF RUSSIA/TRUMP COLLUSION. FBI TAINTED.” And they used this Crooked Hillary pile of garbage as the basis for going after the Trump Campaign!
