And we'll get back to
computability in a bit. But first we're going to
dive a little bit into a little bit older
mathematical technique that preceded the development of
the computability theory. But this technique proved crucial in developing
computability theory. And this had to do with fairly
straight forward looking question, which is, how do you compare
the size of two sets? All right, well, if
they're finite sets, it's easy the sizes like a number, and you just compare the numbers. If a has four elements in B as three, then a is at least as big as B. Fact it's bigger. But we know that well, we can get this equivalent
characterization, which is that the size
of a is at least that it be if there's an onto
function from a to b. So this is a on the left
here, this B on the right. We can describe a function by kind of drawing arrows from elements
of a to elements a, b. And an onto function is one where everything in B has an
arrow coming into it. And that's possible to do if and only if the size of a
is at least that a, B, B add more elements, there wouldn't be enough
arrows to cover it. Now, this notion of
the size of the set as an integer makes sense
only for finite sets. But this notion on the right makes
sense for any sense whatsoever. So we can take this as a definition
of what it means for a to be at least the size of B for any
sets including infinite ones. And, you know, with this
definition in mind, we can ask a question like, is the number of
non-negative even integers at least the number of
non-negative integers, right? It's a subset of it. But pause and think
about this for a second. Well, that amounts to
being able to show that there's an onto function
from the even integers, from the even non-negative integers to all the non-negative integers. And you can do that by just dividing each one of them by two, right? That will map onto
the naturals because every natural number is some
even integer divided by two. So in fact, even though
it's a subset is size is still the least that
as big, as big as that event. Similarly, clearly the set of real numbers is at least as big
as the real numbers between 01. But what about the other
way by this definition? Well, according to this definition, pause and think about this. If you haven't seen it before. We want to be able to
find an onto function. And there's a lot of ways to do this. But essentially I
think something like some modification of
arctangent pulled this off. So essentially any function that
is only defined between, say, 01, but it goes up as the
input approaches 0, it asymptotically goes
down to infinity. And as the input approaches one, it asymptotically
goes up to infinity. So that would be a function that maps onto all of the real numbers. Every real number can be hit by
specifying something between 0 and What about the power set of N, the set of all natural numbers? This are the set of all subsets of natural numbers and
the unit interval. So this one, the way I like
to see this is we can map each subset of n onto a binary number. And it's the number where the set of ones and the binary number, right? So it's a binary
number like 0 dot and then some infinite sequence
of zeros and ones. And it's the positions
of the ones are the, the elements of the set, right? So if for example you had
the prime numbers 235711, you'd have ones at positions 2, 3, 5, 7, and 11, and so forth. And any real number between 01, you could express in that way by
just specifying what's the subset of integer positions and have a
one and they're binary expansion. So what about this? So the, the natural numbers compared to the power set
of the natural numbers. So this one, you know, if you've seen this before,
you know the answer. If not, you know, in fact, the answer to this one is
no, these other three, yes, that this infinite set is at least the size
of this infinite set. And in fact, in all
cases it goes both ways. They have equivalent sizes
by this step in addition, but not for and then the power
set of the natural numbers. So this was the theorem
Cantor proved in the 1800s. And it's that the set of
natural numbers has struck size strictly less than the
power set of natural numbers. In other words, its size
at most that right, there is an onto function
from p of n to n, but there is no undo
function from N to P. So again, pause the VMs and
think about why is this true? What could be the, the
way you prove that? Okay, So we're going to prove this. And it's an interesting
theorem in its own right, but we're mainly interested
in the technique to be. So. So here's the statement. No function from N
to P of n is on two. In other words, every
function from N to P of n misses some subset of n. There exists a subset of the
natural numbers so that for all possible inputs n to F, f of n is not equal to that
subset is. How do we show this? So this proof is very
short, but very tricky. So we'll just write it down and then we'll kind
of look at a picture. So this is in fact the entire
proof here. It is in one line. For all natural numbers n, Let S sub n equal f of that. Right? Just what's the out, what set of natural numbers does
f output when input and call that the end of the nth set that produces some subset
of the natural numbers. Now, define a new set S. This is going to be the set
that is not in the range of f. F cannot map to it. This is the set of all
natural numbers n, So n is not contained in S of it. So the claim that S is
not in the range of f because we have defined, defined it to be so,
so the easiest way to see this is by making a table. So we imagined in this table on, along the top is all the
possible inputs to f, right? And then along the columns is
all the possible outputs of f. And each output of f is a
subset of natural numbers. And what we're gonna do here
is identify each subset of natural numbers with its so-called
characteristic sequence. So this is a binary sequence, is an infinite binary sequence, and it has ones exactly if that position is
a natural number in the set. So maybe as zeros the empty set, it has zeros everywhere. Maybe S1 is the set of
all natural numbers. It has 1s everywhere. If S2 is the set of
even natural numbers, they would have ones on all
the even natural numbers and zeros everywhere else, right? Maybe S3 is the set of
odd natural numbers. Maybe as far as the set of prime. So it says 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 and zeros everywhere else. So depending how f is defined, whatever subsets of N and outputs, that means you get a certain infinite sequence in
each of these rows, one for each input to end. So what did we do
defining S In this way? What we did is we looked at an input n and then
the output of f on n, and we related those. So what we're doing is we're
essentially looking along the diagonal and we're defining has to be the
opposite of the diagonal. Right? So if n is not contained in S sub N, there's a 0 here, so 0 is not
contained in S, 0 is a 0. So that means we put it in the S, meaning Ss characteristic sequence has a one there and is in the tes, but then one is contained in S one, write the set output F on input one, it's as all the natural numbers, so it also has one. So we don't put it into S. In other words, we have a 0 there. And so we're essentially
looking at the diagonal. And that itself is a sequence of bits and we're just defining S to be the bitwise complement of that. So what does that mean? Well, it means that x
cannot equal any of these rows because S
disagrees with each of these rows and at least 1 wherever they meet
along the diagonal. So we're one of the
rows, say it's S3. Well, what is the fourth element? S says it's 0, but as three pairs, I was the third element. S says it's 0, but AS3 says it's one. So S cannot be the third row, but it can't be any other row
either or in other words, S is not in the range of f. It is not any of the
sets output by F. So that function f cannot be onto. So based on this observation, we, we say, okay, well, n and the
power set of N are both infinite, but the power set of
N is somehow bigger. So then can't candor defined the size of n to tip
to say that n is. These are like the counting numbers, but P and NP and bigger
is uncountably infinite. You can't count the outputs
that come out of there. So you can count that the
subsets of natural numbers by putting them into one-to-one correspondence
with the National Archives. Now, I phrase this
like it's only for n. It helps to see the diagonalization When you're
talking about the natural numbers. But actually nothing in this proof as anything special about
the natural numbers, I could have just put
any set a whatsoever error and its own power set, right? And this shows the exact same thing. It says that for any set a, the cardinality of a is strictly less than the cardinality
of the power set of a. Again, that's obvious
for finite sets, like any set of three elements has eight elements and its
power set in general, n element set, set two to
the n possible subsets. But this proof shows it's even
true for infinite sets if we take this definition using
the onto functions to, to be what we mean by
comparing the sizes sets. So this is the
diagonalization technique. And it's useful for, for
proving results like this. But now let's come
back to computability. And let's look at this
argument we made earlier about how do you programming
languages where you can write interpreters must have
non halting programs. That was a diagonalization. So consider what we did. We looked at programs and inputs, but then we defined
a special program, or the only kind of
input it ever gave to a program was the source
code of another program. So if we're going to do that
and we're going to consider all the programs you can
write in our language. And then we're going to
consider all the inputs, but the only ones we care about, our inputs that are themselves
encodings of programs. Then what we get is
this infinite 2D table listing all the
possible programs that we can run and all
the possible program source codes that we could give
them is input when we run it. And let's consider that
they all return Boolean. So say these are just Boolean return that functions in some language. While what did we do? We defined this program V to be such
that on into a p.sit, it would take the program
P would run it on input P, and it would negate that. So what it did is it was looking
at the diagonal of this table. It was looking at all the programs
and what they would do if you ran them on themselves as input, and then it negated that. And therefore v cannot be any of
the rows in this program, right? If it were the third row, you'd have a contradiction. This is either true or false. This is the negation, so
it can't be the third row, it can't be any rattle. In other words, if you can make
a well-defined v like this, it cannot be one of the
programs in your language, but you can write v
as long as you can write an interpreter because
you're going to use Vi to turn around and oninput P1, r1, v1. And so the only way out of this, the only way that we don't get
a contradiction here is that the values here are not
just true and false, that some of these can be undefined
if they're undefined, right? V Running T3 and input P3. If that never halts, the won't halt either. They're both be undefined. We can only cause v
To negate it if you actually get a real answer
out of it, a Boolean, it.