So I want to draw another analogy to the intuition we built
up with the class NP. And this is this notion of
having a verifiable proof. That's what it meant for
a problem to be in NP, is that for Al yes instances, there's a short efficiently
verifiable proof that it is in fact a yes instance. So we can actually make a
similar characterization between the decidable problems and these so-called computable and
innumerable problems, which may not be decidable, but, but they are sort of verifiable. So note that the halting, um, which is we want to know
oninput x, does P halt? Well, if the answer is yes, there's a finite proof
of that fact, right? There's a few ways you
can formalize this, but one way would be just give
the number of steps it needs, say, on a Turing machine. So p halts on input x if and only if there
exists a natural number t, such that P run on
input x for t steps. But this predicate, does P halt
an input x in t steps or not? That's decidable. You can just
run p for that many steps. And if it doesn't hold after
that many steps, you can say no. That might not be the
right answer to this, but you are verifying that he
doesn't call in that amount of time. But there's a relationship
between these two. This existential operator here, p halts an input x if
and only if there is a finite time bound and
how long it takes to hold. So this halts and time problem
is decidable right here. I'm kind of expressing it
like it's the algorithm. But, you know, there, there is an algorithm to answer this question. In other words, there's a,
a so-called total program and a program that
halts on all inputs. That's a verifier for halt in. And for it to verify
the program halts, you have to give it a proof. And the proof is how many
steps it's going to take. And you don't give the right number, it won't be able to verify it. So any decision problem with
this property is called computability innumerable
or CE for short. And the set of computable
innumerable problems is called capital C. And this relationship between the decidable and the computable,
innumerable problems. It's analogous to P versus NP. These you can just decide, you can give a yes or
no answer to any input. These if it's a yes
instance, There's approved, that can be verified and finite time, maybe a huge amount
of time, but finite. And these are the versions of that when you put a polynomial
time constraint on a tripod. All right, so there's
no time-bound on is, there's another name for this
called recursively enumerable or R E that you might see
out there and other papers. This is kind of an older term, but some people still use it. And just like with NP versus co-NP, if there's a no instance, like if p does not
call it an input x, there's no obvious finite
proof of that fact. But the compliment of the halting problem that
asking the question, does P failed to halt? Well, no instances of that. Ones that also they
have proofs, right? So we have this notion
of being able to give a proof of a no instance. And that's cozy problems. Okay, So hopefully the somewhat
makes sense by analogy. Other than the title,
computable enumerable. What is enumerable mean here? So there's an alternate
characterization of this. This is like the verifier
characterization. There's an alternate
characterization using something called an enumerator that really
looks like what it sounds like. So imagine a program P. We call it an enumerator and it
takes no input, right? Or if you give it an input, it just ignores its input. And it runs for right, that they actually
intended to run forever. And occasionally it prints a number. Okay, I've usually said the inputs, I imagine all programs tank are
at their core binary strings. Just for the sake of this slide, it's going to be easier to
imagine them as numbers, right? Maybe I'm writing down the
binary expansion of the number. But it's to make for easier code
to imagine these are integers. So the set of all printed
numbers we call printed of P. So P runs forever. Once in a while it prints a number. Maybe it prints sum with repetitions, but there's some set of
all the numbers that ever prints and that's printed it be, could be the empty set, could
be all the natural numbers. Okay, so let's let L be a subset of and now I'm going to
consider this to be a language because there's a
bijection between N and 01 star. So we're going to show that L is CE, meaning there is this total
program V, the verifier, that lx is true if and
only if there is a witness w that makes V XW say true, right? So this is basically looks at all again be where does not requiring vid have any time-bound or there
to be any length band on w. So we're going to show LLC by the definition on the previous slide, if and only if it is
exactly the set of numbers printed by some program
P. So pause and think, how would you do the
forward direction? So here is a program that would do in the forward direction would
be we have an enumerator P. And we want to know just a sec. Sorry, I wanted to change the
term narrative enumerator. So we have some the numerator P. So it prints some set
of numbers, integers. We want to show that the set is C. In other words, we want to show
there's a total program vi that can verify if given the
proper proof we call a witness w. The bat number really
is printed by two. So here's I will define the, it takes x and w.
And it wants to know is x one of the numbers
that's ever printed by b? Alright, we want to
know that. So how would we allow somebody to furnish
us a proof of this fact? We run it, it prints some numbers. The proof could be the order
in which x gets printed. So they ought to give us a W That's equal to the order
in which it's printed. And so now we don't have to wait
forever to see if it's printed. We just have to run it long enough. W, different numbers get printed. So we start i at 0, and for each y that's printed
by P, we increment i. We just go and go and go and
go until I gets up to W. And at that point, we, why was the number just
print that we see? Is that equal to x? If so, good at x really is the W
with number to get printed. So we return true in that case. Otherwise we return false, right? Again, it doesn't mean in that case, x is never printed by P. It just was not the WIth number printed by p. So w was not an adequate
proof that it's printed. And then we need this
thing to be total. We want this to hold on
all possible inputs. So, so if this wasn't true, mean on the next
iteration when it gets up above W will just
immediately return false. Okay, sorry about that. I keep
noticing things wrong with this slide and we don't have to
check if I is bigger than w. Just once i gets to w will
immediately return, right? If x is not, y will return false. So that's the forward direction. So this gives us a verifier
that x is printed by P. As long as the proof we furnish it is the right order
in which x is print. So now how can we go
the other direction? So pause and think about that
for yourself on your own. Okay, we have to give
an enumerator, right? Which is a program
that takes no inputs. And it should print all the x's that can cause V to return true somehow by
giving the right w, Right? So maybe this V, but
just we have some v, There's some total program, it halts on every pair
of inputs, you get it. We want to know what are
all the first inputs we could give it that
could somehow cause it to return true as long as they gave it the right input for
the second input, right? As long as there exists, that
would make it return true on XW. So we can try this. Let's just enumerate
over all the x's, right? And we're, we're just going
to look for the ones that have a W that make V XW return true. So, well an Uber, I don't know the axis
for the first x, we'll set W to 0, right?
And then what do we do? Well, we ask is V XW
true if not increment W? And just keep going until we
find the w that makes it true. And then we print that x. Do
you see what's wrong with this? Well, imagine we get to an
X where the answer is no. In other words, no for that x, that maybe x equals 1, there's no w where v of
1 w would return true. This will just be an infinite loop, but that's not what we want. If T2 is something that we could return true and we want to get there and we want to print it, but we'll be stuck on one forever looking for a witness for
it that doesn't exist. So this is no good.
That doesn't work. So to make this work, we need to, we're going to use a
trick, It's called dovetailing. And kind of key idea here
was that we tried to like settle the case for x equals 1 before we even thought
about x equals 2. But if the case for x equals one is false, we're never
going to find the W. So we can't do all the computation
we ever need to do for x one before moving on to x equals 2? Because we're going to
have to do an infinite amount of computation there. So the key here is
going to be to splice in computation for all the x's so that the ones that can be verified with a
finite amount of work, eventually they get an arbitrary
amount of work put towards them. Because that sounds a bit abstract. Here's a concrete implementation. We can iterate over all possible t. And this is an infinite loop, right? This, this will run forever
in a T would go up forever. But notice what's
happening air inside. It's got two bounded loops. Unlike this while loop over here, these are two bounded for loops. They start at 0, go up to t, they stop there, and
they call v.floors. And v.events always halts, is total. So this thing will do an infinite number of
iterations of the outer loop. Okay, what does it
do? Well, it's just checking every possible pair
x and w between 0 and t. And if it finds one that makes
be true, it prints that x. But notice T keeps getting
bigger and bigger and bigger. So for any possible pair
X and W, you can have, once T is bigger than both of them, we will find that x and w
and we will print that X. But we won't print and
a dx is they can't make V true because this has to
be true to pass down here.