So here is the theorem that
made Kurt Godel famous PA and shocked the world and certainly shocked
and devastated Hilbert. Hey, he more or less just
shut down Hilbert's idea. Not totally actually terrain. That was the one who kind
of sealed the coffin, but he showed that there is no formal system that's both
complete and consistent, right? There's no way to define a system of mathematics where
every true statement, like everything we'd
want to discover, we can actually find a proof of it. And we can't prove
anything that's on this. So if a state, if a system is powerful enough to actually prove all this
stuff that's true, then it's got a contradiction
lurking in it somewhere. And there's another theorem
that says technically if you can prove a contradiction,
you can prove anything. And so your systems totally useless like every statement
you can write down, including its negation
could be proven, so it would be no good. Okay, So how did Godel
proved as well at an intuitive level and you read popular articles about
Godel's theorem. This is kinda how they express it. He showed that any sufficiently
expressive formal system can be used to express a
self-referential statement. And the statement
looks kinda like this. It's, this statement
cannot be proved, right, like this one right here. So, all right, so what
are we to make of a statement whose
only goal is to refer to itself and say,
I cannot be proved. Well, if it's false, then it can be proved, right? If this statement is false, then it's the case that this
statement can be proved. But that means the system is
not consistent because it now asserts that the statement
cannot be proved, but you also can prove
that it can be proved. Now, if it's true, then it can't be proved, right? That's what it says. But then the system is not complete. Here's a statement that's true, but it's not provable. So more or less all the work went into shine at any sufficiently
expressive formal system, you can do something like this, but we haven't really dug into the weeds of what exactly
is a formal system. So as currently stated, why I'm putting quotes around stuff, not really formally defining what
is a formal mathematical system. These are just tricks
of language, right? I can say stuff like
this, but, you know, it's not that meaningful because I haven't really said what a proof is. I haven't really said
what a statement is. So it's kinda like
this cartoon, right? So it's just a check
of language so we can actually give a more formal proof of Godel's Incompleteness Theorem. And we don't have to go this route. We don't have to do girdles. The original proof Can lot
rely on our intuition. That comes from knowing that the
halting problem is not decidable. So the way we're going to get a statement that's
true but not provable. Is that because the halting
problem is undecidable, there's going to be
statements of the form a certain program P on a certain
input x that does not hold. There will be true, but
they won't be provable. So how do we do this? So suppose for the sake of
contradiction that you've got a formal system and it violates
Godel's Incompleteness Theorem. It's express. Now he said sufficiently
expressive for our purposes. That'll mean, you know, the kinds of statements
we've been making about programs and algorithms
and Turing machines. The systems powerful enough
to make those statements. So you can define all the
things you'd need to define, say to talk about Turing machines. What do you need to
define a Turing machine? Well, it's, you know, if you remember your
undergrad theory course, it's a seven tuple. That seven tuple has
finite sets in it, it as subsets of transition rules. So it's, you know, it's
just basic kind of discrete that you need to
talk about Turing machines. So you need your formal
system to be powerful enough to write down statements like
that and reason about them. It all. And we're also supposing it's
complete and consistent. So what does that mean
for every statement t? Either it's it worth
negation is provable, end. Either one of them is not provable. So exactly one of
these two is frugal. So we're going to show this existed, then we could solve
the halting problem, which we showed cannot be them. So if you have a formal system like this that's powerful enough to talk
about program behavior. Then to solve the halting problem, do is given p and x, we're going to execute
two searches in parallel. One, we're going to search for
a proof that P of X false. And two in parallel, we're going to search for a
proof that P of x does not hold. So whether it halts are not
exactly one of these has a proof. So completeness and consistency imply that the true one is provable. Except now I do have to get
into a bit of a technicality. It's this distinction between
provability in truth. Again, this could be one of
those weird formal systems that can prove false things, but it's consistent because it
can't prove their negation. So technically this
is a weaker thing. Then got to actually prove Like a week incompleteness
theorem that the soundness version of
Godel's Incompleteness Theorem. So a sound system is one that
it's even stronger than saying, you can't prove a contradiction. It's also saying, well, whichever one of the two you can
prove is actually the true one. So you don't somehow screw up and end up proving all the false statements. So it's a stronger
condition to assume. And if this virtue of the system, then this would be a solution to, this would be an algorithm
for the halting problem. But, you know, one. The halting problem is undecidable. So there is no such system, or we could use it to
solve the halting problem. So, so what this means is
that no system expressive enough to reason about programs and computation is both
complete and sound. Now, if you want to know the proof of the full Incompleteness
Theorem, we'll do that next. And if you want to see
more details about it, you can go to this blog
post of Scott Aronson, where he gets into details about the distinction
between these two concepts.