So turns proof that the halting
problem is undecidable. A lot like Kanter's proof that there are more subsets
of natural numbers. The natural numbers, it's very short, but very tricky, right? It seems like a very difficult
idea to come up with. And it's not the kind of thing
we necessarily want to repeat. For every problem that we're
trying to show is undecidable. So there's an analogy to
be made here, NP hardness, which is that it took a
lot of work to prove that this original problem
circuit SAT is NP hard. But once you know it is, the easy way to show new
problems are NP-hard, is not to repeat the
full simulation of a nondeterministic Turing
machine using a Boolean circuit. It's to use reductions. And so you have this notion of a polynomial-time computable function that define your notion of reduction. And you reduce circuit saf to other problems to
show their NP complete. And the kinds of data we deal with are all kinds
of discrete data formulas, graphs, lists of integers. And now we have an analogous situation where our
sort of original hard problem, the one that's the most
difficult to show is, is undecidable, is halting. And we're going to use this
notion of reductions as well. Now we don't require them anymore to be polynomial time computable. Most of the ones we'll
talk about will be, there'll be actually very easy to compute, but we don't require that. They don't need to be. And to show other
problems are undecidable. We're not going to repeat the
diagonalization technique. Instead we're going to
reduce halting to them. Or once we've collected a list
of other undecidable problems, we can use those and
we can reduce those to a new problem to show the
new problem is undecidable. And a lot of the examples we'll see, the questions are going to be questions about the
behavior of proof. There's other undecidable problems, but this is kinda the most
straightforward thing to start with. So let's start with another
variant on the halting problem. And this is called the, the no input halting problem, right? Or I call the hauled
him sub epsilon here. And here. Instead of the input being a program and an input is just a program. And I call it the no input halting because it's
essentially what if you gave cue like the trivial
and just the empty string. So essentially you're not asking what it's gonna do
on an arbitrary input. You just want to know, if you ran
it with empty, what would it do? What a halt on that one input or not. So this is clearly reducible to the more general
halting problem, right? If you had an algorithm for the
more general halting problem, that can answer this question about
programs and arbitrary inputs. Well, you could just ask
him this question and the second input you give would
be the empty string epsilon. So, so if we gets all halting, we could use that to solve this. But this looks like a
very special case of it. It seems like not to be as difficult
as the full halting problem. But we're going to show it is, It's also undecidable by
showing the reduction in the other way that we can reduce
halting to this special case. So we'll show that if we could
solve this epsilon halting problem, then we could solve the
full halting problem. So the reduction is
going to look like this. Given an input of the
form halting expects, which is a program P and an input X. To give to the program. We want to output an instance
of the halting epsilon problem, which has just a single program. And here it is, Here's the
program we're going to output. I've called it Q sub px. And that's to emphasize
that both p and x are sort of hard-coded
into the program. And in the super high
level pseudo-code, it's not clear what this
means is run p on input x. And you'll notice q takes
an input, ignores it. But where do p and x come from? So just to be concrete,
let's use Python. So here is a Python implementation of Euclid's algorithm for
greatest common divisor. So let's imagine we wanted to
solve the halting problem here. Then our program P would be this
source code over here for GCD, our input x maybe would be 624. We want to figure out what's
the greatest common divisor of these two numbers above that? Well, that's what we'd want
to do if we're running velocity actually are by students. Just if we ran GCD with the
Zen book wouldn't hold. Now we know it does. Taught, we showed at all. It's actually pretty quickly. But let's imagine we
want to transform this into an instance of the
epsilon halting problem. So we want to output a single program that if you run it
on the empty input, it'll halt if and only if the stones. So you can imagine if you go in here and introduce an infinite loop, well then the new program would
have an infinite loop two. So here's what it looks like. It takes an input Y, but
it just ignores it, right? So it's going to do the same thing no matter what input you give it, meaning it will do the same
thing on input epsilon. And what does it do? Well,
it has this whole program P, this greatest common divisor
function just hard-coded into it. And it's got that a 1624. These are just hardcoded
constants as well. So on input y just ignores its input. It turns around and cause
this program down here, this Python function
on this one input. And then notice that P over here, or just write p on input x
is going to hold if and only if Q px halts on input epsilon. So, so we've gotten what we wanted, which is that the
answer to the question, does Q px halt on the empty input is the same as
the answer to the question, does p all on input x. So let's see another
undecidable problem. So again, it's a question about the behavior of a program
has a lot of these are this one. The question is, were given a program and we're not given as input, an input to the program, but we still want to
know something about the behavior of this program
and one of its inputs and its, Is there an input Y, you can get it. That will cause it to output 42. Let's suppose it as an
integer return type. So this is also undecidable as is basically any question about
the behavior of a program. So to show it's undecidable. Now we're going to show that
halting epsilon reduces to it. That's sufficient because
we already showed halting epsilon is undecidable. So here's the reduction. We want to know. Given input peer program, does it halt on the empty string? So to reduce that to
this 42 question, the reduction is going to
output this program QP, that depends on the right. So it's got P sort
of encoded into it. And what does it do? It turns around, it just
runs p on the empty string. And if that ever
halts, it returns 42. It outputs this thing. And note that if p doesn't called, then it never halts. So in particular it never returns 42. So here's a concrete
example just to show you what By we're hard-coding p into q. Well, suppose that your program P or this Python program that FLM
is Fermat's Last Theorem is, and this is looking
for a counterexample to for bonds last theorem. It's never going to find that. So this program which
ignores its own input. So on the empty string, it, it never halts it
in, hold on anyone. But if this were P, then Q P would have this program encoded into it as like a
subroutine it can call. And what QP will do on input Y, we'll just ignore why
doesn't pay any attention. It'll call FLM on the empty string. And if that ever halts, which it turns out it
doesn't in this example, then it will return 42. Alright, and so we get
P on the empty string, halts if and only if there's
a y that makes Q output 42. But this condition right here, Q does the same thing no
matter what its input is. So whether there's a y that
makes Q output 40 to it, if any, why doesn't
all of them do it? But if FLM doesn't hold
on the empty string, then no, I can make you up with. So we actually get a stronger
condition than we really need.