So let's step back a bit
from the sort of MCI details of the arithmetical hierarchy and these various definitions
of undecidability. And get at. Why were these people
sort of thinking along these lines when all this stuff was invented back in the 30s Anyway, while they were trying
to get at, you know, Hilbert's dream of automating
mathematical reasoning. So in order to talk
sensibly about that, you need a formal
way of talking about mathematical reasoning and proofs
and theorems and so forth. So we've talked a bit about
this in a previous chapter. We're going to get slightly
more technical here, but still not to the level of
technicality class on logic. So we'll say a formal system
consists of a couple of things, a finite set of axioms. So these are like statements we just assume are true without proof. We saw those nine
axioms of set theory. Those are statements about sets
and what rules they have to obey. And then it includes some
rules of inference, right? So this is something you might
have learned a long time ago in a very boring dry math class that there's something
called modus ponens. So very, very simple rules of inference at the level of
detail we tend not to talk about when we write down
our proofs like if a is true and the statement
a implies b is true, then that implies that B is true, right? That's modus ponens. So there's a few other rules of inference and they're
all like this symbol. And a theorem is a statement that is provable by applying the rules
of inference to the axioms. And technically you
may not believe it, but just those nine axioms
that we wrote down. If you apply these simple rules
to those axioms in the right way, you can get all the
mathematical theorems that I've ever been proven. So this isn't how we think about it when we're
actually writing those proofs. But it is possible to say that
you don't approve of it there. And it's just applying these rules, starting with axioms until you finally have resulted
in the state megawatt. So this is how we're
going to formalize, how we talk about
mathematical reasoning. And formal systems
are, or how we do it. Now, formal systems
aren't all good, right? So we know a couple of
properties to be true of them. One is that the formal system
should be consistent and consistent means that no
contradiction can be proven. And the way we formalize that
is that for each statement t, at most one of t or the negation
of t is provable, right? So when you get a contradiction,
what does it mean? It means you can prove both a
statement and its negation. And what that means is your
formal system is no good for resolving which
statements are true. Because if you can prove goal, it doesn't tell you which one
of them might actually be true. So it's actually no good. So this is something
that we want to require a formal system in order for it
to actually be helpful to us. But it's not the only
thing that we want. We also would like for
it to be complete, meaning that all statements
actually can be resolved by proof. We can formalize that as
for each statement III, at least one of t are not. T is provable. If neither was provable, then, okay, we don't get a contradiction. Neither does it help us figure
out whether to use true. So these are two properties
we would want to be true, the formal system that we use to help us discover mathematical facts. And if it violated
either one of these, it would not help us with regard to the statements where
it was in violation. So what we would like as a formal system that's both
consistent and complete. So for each statement t, exactly
one of t are not, T is provable. So a consistent and
complete formal system would fulfill Hilbert's dream, right? All mathematical truth
can be discovered simply by exploring the proofs that
are possible in the system. And they can approve
fear would not be like the kind of thing you're
doing for your homework. A proof would be just a finite string that's encoding what order to apply rules of inference starting from the axioms in order to get
your gear their statement. So it's just a systematic
exploration of strings that encode
rules of inference. That the statement on
the end of that string is the theorem that's been proven. So you could just iterate
over all possible proofs. You know, looking for either a
proof of t or proof of not T. If the system is
consistent and complete, you will be guaranteed
to find one of them. And I say you, I mean
an algorithm here. This would be the algorithm that can automate
mathematical reasoning input t. It would search for a proof of t and in parallel would
search for a proof of not T. And one of them, it would find and it would tell
you whether T was true or false. Now, there's a little
technicality here. Technically, we would
have had to require one more thing called
soundness, right? So we say a formal system is sound if all the statements you
can prove are actually true. This is a little bit murky. If you haven't seen a logic before, it kind of sounds like I'm just using synonyms here as though
they're not synonyms. So it is technically possible
for you to write down formal systems that are
consistent but unsound, right? Like maybe everything
they prove is halts. So again, this would be
kind of a useless system, something that we never
prove a contradiction, but it doesn't prove anything true. However, they, you know, if
everything approved was false, you could just negate
it to get the answer. But this, this is the kind of
system that logicians were reasoning about to try to figure out the answer to Hilbert's question.