So we saw that the halting
problem is computable, enumerable, but it's not decidable. So a corollary of this
is that the set of decidable languages
is a proper subset of the set of computable
enumerable languages. And unlike P versus NP
here we know it's proper. We can actually
exhibit a language and that's CE, but not decidable. And the complement of any decidable
language is decidable, right? You can just tab, flip true answers to false and
false answers to true and that, that decides the complement. But one thing that
we're going to stay. So the second part is not
quite a corollary of this, but we'll state is that c
is not equal to cosine, but deck is equal to codec. So deck is a proper subset of the coping beautifully enumerable languages and these two are not eat. So here's an exercise to do, or we can talk through it
in the lecture if you want. But here's an exercise to
think about on your own. And it's a good exercise
to do to kind of solidify understanding of these two. Which is that a language is
decidable if and only if both is and its complement are
computable, innumerable. Or in other words, it's decidable
if it's C and it's also Cosi, mean and its compliment of C. So, huh? Okay, so we can generalize this
idea just like we put p at the bottom of the
polynomial hierarchy and these alternating quantifiers
kinda went above it. Well, the first definition of CE we saw had this exists quantifier. So we can define sigma 0 and pi 0 to just be the
decidable languages. Sigma one is c and pi one is cozy, kind of like sigma one and sigma
and pi P1 for AND, and OMP. And then we can define
this hierarchy above them. So that this is basically the same thing as the
definition of the sigma p k. That language isn't sigma k. If there's a language one level
low on the opposite side, the co language and pi k minus one, so that you can express the
predicate a of x as being true if and only if there exists
a W that makes b of x w true. So in other words, but
the math is expressible by for all the predicate going
down to the sigma k minus 2 level. So it's essentially saying, hey, x is true of there exists
one string such that for all of another string there exists another strain,
et cetera, et cetera. And then at the bottom you
have a decidable predicate. And we just define pi
k to because sigma k. So we're kinda zipping through this. We're not going to
spend a lot of time on this so-called arithmetical
hierarchy I just wanted to emphasize is define the exact same way as the
polynomial hierarchy, but without the polynomial
time constraint. And unlike the polynomial hierarchy, we know this one is proper. Sigma k is a proper
subset of sigma k plus 1. So when I, like I said, we're not gonna spend
a ton of time on it, but just to make some
of this abstract, this a little more concrete. Here's an example from
the second level, right? And it's provably at the second
level and not any lower. And it's the, the
problem given a program. Is it total, meaning, does it halts on every input? So we're not going to prove
that it's that it's not C, but it turns out if not,
let's just observe, okay, why is it in pi to pi, two predicates are
going to be the ones expressible with a for all exists. And then a decidable predicate. P is a total program. If what's true? Well, if for all strings
x, you might give to B, there exists a time-bound
t such that if you run p on input x and halts in
at most t steps, right? And notice this
predicate is decidable. If you're given p and x and t, you can certainly run p on input x for t steps and
see if it all right, so that is perfectly well decidable. And this predicate
is expressible as a for all and then an
exists and then this. But notice, unlike in NP or
the polynomial hierarchy, these are, if you think of
these as like searches, these are unbounded searches. There's no limit on how big x
can be or how big T can be. You need that for every
single string x there is, there are infinitely many. If there's any t, no matter how huge, that makes this true, then P is total. So that shows the total is n pi to, it takes a little more
work to show that it's not in sigma 1 or pipeline
that that is also true.