So there was this big
project proposed by this famous German mathematician
David Hilbert when he addressed the International Congress of Mathematicians that 9800, right? It's kinda like in 2000 we had
declared Millennium Prize Problems. Hilbert did, did a similar
thing a 100 years before, laid out 23 problems he thought were very foundational
fundamental problems that, that mathematicians should try to
tackle over the coming century. And some of them took the better
part of that century to resolve. Some of them are still unresolved. So Hilbert's tenth problem was this. And it says specify a procedure. Now they didn't really
have this word yet. That's part of what we're
talking about in this chapter is how did we come to define
what we mean by procedure? But just think algorithm, I guess I just thank program in your favorite
programming language. He said specify a procedure
which in a finite number of operations enables one to determine whether or not a
given DO fan tiny equation. So a polynomial equations with integer coefficients
with an arbitrary number of variables has an integer solution. Now, note something curious
about is he's not even bothering to ask whether
such a procedure exists. Is very optimistic here, right? He just thought, well,
clearly there is a way to do this and he just
set out the goal to be, find it like what's the algorithm you can follow to figure out whether a multivariable polynomial
has an integer solution. Now, many decades later, he proposed another problem, even more ambitious and even more optimism that he thought it
obviously had a solution. It's called the incidence problem, which in German means
the decision problem. And the problem he said is solved. One does a procedure that
allows one to decide the validity of a given
a logical expression by a finite number of operations. So here, think of the
phrase validity of a given a logical expression
that has meaning that the truth or falsity of a
mathematical statement. You want an automated
theorem prover that can prove or disprove any mathematical
statement you can write down. For example, pause and see if you, you know what this mathematical
statement corresponds to. There exists x, y, z, n in the non-negative
integers so that n is at least three and x to the n plus y to the
n plus z to the n, x equals e to the antibody. So a sub-question for both of these, Hilbert's tenth problem in 1900 and the enshrinement
problem later is, what's exactly, what exactly
do they mean by procedure? What exactly does that mean? So suppose that weren't
possible to find it. How would you prove that
there's no procedure? You'd have to know what
precisely you mean by the word procedure to know
whether or not one exists. So the goal of this, this sort of enshrined in
this problem is to set an axiomatic foundation
for mathematics, right? To, to reduce all of mathematics to peer set theory and logic and create a formal system powerful enough to prove all the
mathematical facts there. So. This is what mathematical
logic looks like. And I often think of mathematical
logic of being something like it's sort of like
Mathematical Anthropology. It's like mathematicians
studying what it is that mathematicians do when
they're doing mathematics. So to, so to do that you have to take all the concepts that map
editions normally use. Integers, real numbers, sets, functions and relations,
partial orders, all that stuff. And you've got to define what
exactly are those things and its simplest if you can
define them all in terms of just some primitives
that you build up from. And it turns out all those can
be defined using only sets. So one example is that if you have nothing but
the concept of a set, you don't have much,
You have the empty set. You haven't talked about any
other kind of object yet. So you have just the empty set, but you don't have any other
objects you defined yet. So how could you possibly go
about defining other things? Well, you have the empty set, so you can put it in another set. You can talk about the set
containing the empty set. And then you can talk about
taking that object and consider the set
containing only it, right? So these singletons sets that
are kinda recursively nested. And this could be used to define
the natural numbers, right? You could say the natural
number we're just going to identify with the empty set. We're going to say one is
the set containing only 0, containing only one, and so on. So this is one way to just say
what are the natural numbers? Well, they correspond to this
infinite hierarchy of sets. And now you didn't have to talk about any object other than a set here. And once you've defined sets, you can also define
ordered pairs, right? So a set gives you the ability
to talk about an unordered pair. A comma b has two elements,
but there's no order. B comma a is the same set, but you can encode an
ordered pair by also including a set telling you which
of these two should be the for. So the set, the
singleton a and the set, the set containing both a and B. It tells you what both elements
are and which ones the first, so that's an ordered pair. A function is defined
by its graph, right? The graph is the set of ordered
pairs input comma, output. So this is the set right here defines the function n-squared
sequences, right? Infinite sequences can be
defined by the function f of n equals the nth
element of the sequence. You can define a real number
as a pair of sequences. One is the digits on the
left of the decimal point, the others the digits on the
right of the decimal point. And on the left it would
be a finite sequence. On the right it could be infinite. So you can define anything that
these are just some examples. Anything you want can just be
defined using only, right? So you just have to wrap your head
around the intuitive concept of a set and everything else
can follow from that. But let's pause there. What exactly is a set though? Like best is the one thing
that we have to somehow take on faith that such a
thing called sets exist. So Russell's paradox came from
thinking about this problem. What objects exactly is
it that sets can contain, you can contain other sets. We did that on the last slide, so, okay, assets can
contain other sets. You've all encountered
the power set, right? That's a set of subsets of another's ad sets can
contain other sets. Sure that Ought to be allowed, especially
if we're starting with only sets. But it sets can contain other sets. Kinda set contain itself.
Can you have a set S? So S is contained in S, right? It's not clear what that would
mean exactly, but it's just, if you're just defining
this element of operation that between sets
and things that they contain. And if the things they
contain can be other sets, then you're going to
have the same type of object on each side of that relation. So suppose that you will add this. He said You're going to have
sets that contain themselves. But then some sets don't
like the set 1, 2, 3. It does not have, you know, it only has three elements
and none of them are the set 123 individual editors. So you have some sets that contain themselves and others that
don't if this is possible. So define Rs is the Russell said, this is a little bit hard to read. This is the set of all sets, right? Instead of all sets that
don't contain themselves. Okay? If this is allowed in
this set can be defined. So what, you know, what's going on here? Well, you can ask this question, is our Russell set is, are contained within itself or not? Well, if it contains itself, then it would not be an
element of this set. But this set is r. Therefore, r would
not be contained in. But if r is not contained in art satisfies the condition of this set. So it should be in there,
but then R would be contained in R. So you
get a contradiction. R cannot be defined
essentially because it could, you'd have this paradox
and this contradiction. So one solution to this is what's called a restricted
set comprehension. And the idea here is I
just said the set of all sets that don't
contain themselves. But usually when we talk
about the set of all objects, we usually sort of say, we're taking them
from some larger set. So we're saying, you
know, so the primes, for example, you tend to
talk about it's the set of all positive integers that
obey a certain constraint. You're not taking
them from the set of real numbers are the binary string. So restricted set comprehension means when you write set
comprehensions like the US, meaning the set of all objects
that obey some constraint. You have to first specify a bigger
set you're taking them from. And then this is
specifying a subset of it. So here are some subset of
aids got some things from a, but not all and not the
ones that satisfy this. So after Russell pointed out that the problem with allowing this
unrestricted set conference. So the point is this then would
prevent the paradox because now you first have to
define this bigger set. And before you've defined
that are doesn't exist. So our couldn't possibly
be one of the things that year pulling from a to test whether
it's going to be and are not. So based on trying to fix
little problems like this, the logicians weren't and
came up with a set of so-called axioms and the states
how sets are supposed to behave. And we're, this is not part of this sort of official
material for the course. I just wanted to show it to you
that it is possible to say, okay, what are the things we
have to assume or truth sets? And from that we can get all
the rest of mathematics. And this appears to be enough, right? So some of them are a
little complicated, but summer are fairly
easy to understand the, the axiom of infinities as there's a set with infinitely many elements. The axiom of pairings
is for any two sets, x and y, There's a set that
has both of them as members. So note that all of
them start with a for. All right, this is a
statement all said. So it's all sets x also too. I have to obey this constraint. This is all set z and all sequence sequences events That's w1 to wn
obey this constraint except one. There's one said there's one
acts in the axiom of infinity, gives you the first set, right? So this says there is a set
with infinitely many elements. And then all the other
axioms start with a for all. So what this does is it
gives you a way to just declare some set exists. That's axiom number 6 declares
that this set exists. And sometimes people
take this domain. This is the set of natural numbers, but there's some said that exists. And then these give you a
way to build other sets. They say if these sets can be fat, for any sets that you can define, you can define a new set, right? So for all x and y, there exists a z that pairs
x and y together, right? So, okay, so this is going to
be the general theme and we're going to think about
the sort of computationally. So when we wanted to find what
do we mean by computation? So we're imagining we're
in the early 19th century. We don't yet know what procedure
or algorithm means exactly. We're going to follow
this approach of defining some sort of atomic
computational operations. And then define a
computable operations to be any way of composing on. And people had proposed a variety
of solutions to this problem. Lambda calculus was
proposed by church. The general recursive functions were being pushed by Godot and
somebody named her brand. And there are generalization of
another thing that's now called primitive recursive functions
and Skolem and define. And then Turing machines
were devised by terrain. Of course he didn't call
them Turing machines, what we call an interview machines. And it turns out all these
definitions are equivalent, right? They all capture the exact
same class of computations. And, okay, and they
could be equivalent, but still not capture everything
we can do in the real world. But the Church-Turing thesis states that they do that anything that could quote reasonably recall the
computation can be done by days. So one of turns, big achievements in 1936 was to show the so-called halting
problem is undecidable. So this is the problem given an
algorithm isn't going to halt, or there's another variance of that. So that in turn means that this insight into problem that
Hilbert proposed is undecidable. Because remember the Enchantments
problem was figure out an algorithm where you can write down any mathematical statement you want. And that algorithm, we'll figure
out whether it's true or false. Well, one example of a mathematical statement is
this Turing machine halts. You can encode that as
a mathematical theorem. But since it's not decidable to
figure out if it halts or not. If you supposedly had this universal theorem
prover solving the problem, it could figure the truth or falsity of that statement,
but terrain grooved. No algorithm can do that. So Hilbert was somewhat devastated by this is
ruined his whole program. But, you know, the, the authors of the
textbook say they find it quite limited, liberating, right? So there's essentially
mathematics will never end. We're not going to be
able to automate it with an algorithm that just does
the job of mathematicians.