Now you hear about fact, like the halting problem is not
decidable and you can't take a given Turing machine or Python program and determine
whether it's going to hold. And you might think, well,
maybe we should just switch to a different programming
language, right? One where all the programs
hall and we don't have this problems if you write a program that's guaranteed to hold. So what we'll argue here is that
if you're a programming language, Let's programs, run other programs. Then in that programming language, some programs must be non halting. So, you know, what's a program, one of the other programs or
operating systems do this. Web browsers with JavaScript do this, or more generally, you know that they have a JavaScript interpreter. More generally, any decent
programming language has an interpreter, right? Otherwise known as
a universal program in the language of
theoretical computer science. It's a program you, so that given two inputs, one is a description of a program P, and the second is an input
you'd want it to be, it runs it T on that input x
and does what it would do. So that's essentially
what an interpreter does. So suppose your programming language has an interpreter
or you can do this. So consider defined in a
Boolean return type program V. So like a Python function
V and what is V2? Well, oninput p, where p is say the source code
of another program. Where V does is it
runs p on input peak. Meaning if it runs be an input, it gets it is its own source code. And saying programs can
take other program doesn't, but their interpreters do that. And in this language,
we're assuming v has this power to take as input
a program and then run it. But then run it where it's input is itself another program
and at the same program. So that's what V does. It seem like kind of a useless task. But now let's answer this question. Does that, but then what
does it do with that? Well, if P returns symbol
and then V negate. So whenever P returns, when given itself as input, if it ever does return, v will simply negate the
return the opposite. So what now is the
output of v on itself? What have we were to run B with
its own source code as well. It's not well-defined because supposedly it takes v0 runs in
an input V in negates that, but what's the output? Is it true or false? So you'd get a contradiction no matter which one
of those with them. The way out of this is that, well, it must be the case that if you
run V on input v, It won't hold. All right, so in other words, any programming language powerful enough to write an interpreter for itself must necessarily contain
programs that don't hold. So this notion of universality
implies non holding programs.