So this next part
gets a bit technical. You want to see the
details where I got this. It's from this blog
post and Scott Aronson, I've not in the textbook. But if you want to see
the full modern day based on computation proof of Godel's
Incompleteness Theorem. Here's a way to do it. And we do it by making up a new problem called
consistent guessing. So this is not a decision problem. This is a more general thing. An algorithm solves. Consistent guessing if
it can do the following, it takes as input a program. And it's not quite the
epsilon halting problem. We require something a
little more stringent, which is that if it does hall, we actually want to be able to get the right answer, accept or reject. So what we need to
do is to say, well, if P on the empty string accepts, our algorithm should accept P. If
P on the empty string rejects, our algorithm should reject P. And if P and the empty
string runs forever, then our algorithm has
to give an answer. It doesn't matter what it is. It
could be either accept or reject, but it has to halt, right? So we didn't require this. We allowed it to run forever. In this case, it could just run p on the empty string and do what it does, meaning to accept or reject.
But we're saying not enough. If p does not halt on the empty string to say you've
solved consistent guessing, you need to give some answer
after some finite amount of time. And if P on the empty string does
actually hold and get an answer, you have to give the right answer. So this problem is uncomfortable. There's no algorithm that can
solve this problem and that can be proved using diagonalization similar to the original halting problem, but we won't do that here. So with consistent guessing
in mind and unbind, beautiful, Here's a modern day
proof of Godel's Incompleteness. There are fixed from the previous one that only
referred to soundness. So if P on the empty string accepts, then what we're gonna do is
exploit the sort of asymmetry between a program of halting and not halting a statement of the form. A program accepts an input or
a program halts on an input. If that's true, there's always
a proof of that, right? There are some mathematical
statements that don't have a proof, but this is the kind that does write a transcript of the steps
of the computation, for example, is a proof that
that that program accepts. So if, so, if the following
statement accepts p Epsilon is true. So this is the statement that
asserts P accepts the input epsilon. If this is true, then it's provable. And that similarly olds
for rejects be epsilon. If that is true, that
P rejects Epsilon, There's a proof of that fact. So this is a little bit
stronger statement then we can make about arbitrary
mathematical statements. So now we suppose for the
sake of contradiction that our formal system violates
Godel's Incompleteness Theorem. It's expressive enough to reason
about programs and computation. It's complete and consistent
meaning for every statement t, exactly one of t or its
negation is brutal. So here's how we use
that fact to solve the consistent guessing problem
and get a contradiction. So we're defining a program, see here that takes as
input a program pizza. I'm going to solve
consistent guessing. So how does P solve it? It has two searches
in parallel for that searches for a proof that P
accepts the empty string. And it also searches
for a proof that P does not accept the
empty string, right? Notice I didn't say reject air. I just said search for prove
that it does not accept. Now there's an asymmetry here, right? So and if it finds
this proof, it says, except, if it finds this
proof it says reject. So now here's the key difference with the original prove consistency and this star statement and the air
implies that p Epsilon rejects. There's no proof of one to be found. Right? But now, completeness and consistency give us that there
is a proof of tip, right? One of these has to be provable, so there's no proof of this. There is a proof of this. So C will reject as it needs to. And the second case, well,
if P of epsilon accepts, right, then there is no
proof of number two, right? And by completeness there
is a proof of number one. And so we will find that
and we will accept. So it may be neither. These is provable in that case. Went away. Forget I said that. So, all right, So if p on input epsilon accepts
than SEA accepts the panel, epsilon rejects than C rejects. And so c solve consistent guess it. So why is this all
consistent guessing? Well, because it
always halt note it's searching for a proof
of this statement or its negation and completeness and consistency give you one
of them will be found. In this kind of reasoning tells
you that it'll actually be the correct answer when
it gives an answer. So one of the searches will
succeed, It'll be correct. And this contradicts
the young computability of consistent guessing. So we get Godel's
Incompleteness Theorem. No system expressive
enough to reason about programs is both
consistent and complete.