So we've alluded to
this halting problem that terrain showed with undecidable. Let's define it a bit more formally. Now, it, I'd said it's about
detecting whether programs halt. Well, programs take inputs sometimes. So what's the input? Now there's a bunch of variance
or the halting problem, and we'll look at some
of them on the homework. But for now, let's define
the halting problem. The one is language we call halting to be the one that's
given two inputs, a program P and an input X to P. So an input in the
format that P expects. And the question is, will p.sit
hold when we run it on input x? Or put another way, if p has some notion of
output when it holds, is the output well-defined? Now we haven't defined
this class yet, so I'll say deck is the
class of decidable problem, the decision problems
that are decidable by some program with no bounds whatsoever on the time
or the memory you need. So you just need that holds with an answer eventually on
all input instances. And this is terrains famous
theorem that halting is not indicate is not a
decidable problems. No algorithm can figure this out. So what default in Word a cycle? Alright, suppose that weren't true and there was this
program called halts. So that for every program P
and input string x to be, if you called halts
with input p and x, it would tell you exactly
whether Px holds. Well, this would be
handy for debugging. Of course, compilers could
warn about infinite loops, but they will have much more
profound uses done this actually consider calling halts p.sit
with just a garbage input. This is going to be a program
that just ignores it simpler. So just give it the
empty string as input, where P is this program. But pause and think about
what this program does. If it ever halts, it's going to resolve a
major mathematical problem. So I just look at it for a second
and figure out what it does. And we can talk about it in
lecture time if you want. Okay, so we're going to prove now that halting is not decidable
and we're going to use terrains. Original proof though phrased
a little bit differently. So I like doing this isn't
proof by contradiction. So let's suppose for the
sake of contradiction that the program halts exists. I like the proof by contradiction
because it gives us this concrete program halts
that we can get our hands on. We can use it. We can call it as a subroutine
and other programs, right? So if this thing existed, we could write this very
simple program that calls Paul to the subroutine. It's called Catch-22. And it expects its
input to be a program, not a program and an input, just a program. It's
only got one input. And it calls halts, but
halts takes two inputs. The first one is supposed
to be a program. It gives P as in, but, but the second one and expects a string of the kind
you'd get to p. Well, we're just going to
give the source code of P itself as the second. And so we're asking, if you were to run p in the string input you gave it is
the source code of p itself. What would it do? What a halt. And what catch-22 will
do with B is that if p would halt when
given itself as input, catch-22 is going to do the opposite. It'll loop forever. But if P will not halt
on input P and halts can tell us that then catch-22
will immediately return. So it will hold. So now here's the question. What's going to happen if we run
catch-22 in the input we give it is the source code for
the program catch-22 itself. So let's think about
what it's gonna do. It's going to ask the halts program, would catch-22 halt
with Catch-22 as input. If so, loop forever, otherwise, ALT, so Catch-22 on its own, it on the input itself halts if and only if it does novels
a contradiction. So what's wrong with this? Well, if faults existed, we could easily write this program. So it must be that the halts
program does not exist. In other words, halting
is not decidable. The halting problem is not decidable. So it may not look exactly like it, but this is yet another example
of the diagonalization technique. So one way to see that is
to consider that we can list on the left side here all the possible programs where we
might want to ask do they hold? And up here we can list all the possible inputs we
might give to those programs. And we ask, Does it
hold on those inputs? And for this proof, the only kinds of inputs we're actually going to consider are going
to be the kind that look like source coder programs. So you could imagine there's a lot of other binary strings
that don't look like source coder programs will just filter only down
to the ones that do. So. Now, you know the, the rows and columns here
are kind of the same type. And so we fill in this infinite table where I'm not saying there's
an algorithm to do, I'm just saying that this
table exists mathematically same for each program
and each input to it. That's the source code
or some other program. Would it, with this program
halt with this input? Maybe this one never halts. Maybe this one always holds, and the others kind kinda
depend on their input. So catch-22 is this program, so it should be some row
of this table, right? It has some, if it exists, it has some behavior on
every possible input, including the inputs
that are programs. But we've defined it to be the exact opposite the
diagonal of this table. So it cannot actually be one of the rows of the table or
you get a contradiction. When you, when you
look at the diagonal element that it intersects. But since it's a valid program, if halts exist, halts
doesn't exist either.