Okay, so let's look at another surprising
phenomenon that can happen, which is that a lot of these combinatorial questions you
ask for some perfect solution. So for example, in a CNF formula, you need to satisfy every
single clause in order to satisfy the entire formula. Well, we could relax that and say, Well now we just want to get as many clauses satisfied as possible. Maybe it's not necessary
to satisfy all of them, but they somehow represent
some constraints. Like remember our cnf example
was the, The Dinner Party. We have a bunch of constraints
we want to satisfy by choosing the right food and drink
and cheese and so forth. Maybe we, we satisfy ourselves
and not getting every constraint, but as many of them as possible. So this is an optimization problem. It's not a decision problem, although we can phrase it
like a decision problem. And the optimization problem
is given a K CNF formula, find the largest number of
clauses that can be satisfied. Okay, so trivially, the decision problem K SAT
is reducible to max case at because you can simply ask whether the largest number of
clauses that can be satisfied is m, where m is the number of clauses. So if you knew how to get the number, you'd know whether the number
is the maximum it could be. So you could solve
the decision problem. Can you satisfy all of them? So in particular, Max 3
SAT is NP-complete as, as max force at max five set. But remember that to SAT is NP. So if I'm given a two CNF formula, there's only two literals per clause. Many clauses as I want. I can actually figure
out by reduction to graph reachability whether it's
possible to satisfy them on. But sort of relax in
this asking, Well, can I suppose is not
satisfiable and I want to know what's the largest
number of them that can be satisfied even in a two CNF formula, that problem is NP-complete. So it's easy to tell if all
the clauses can be satisfied. But if they cannot, then it's hard
to find out exactly how many. Maxcut as we just saw is sort
of another example where the quest for the best solution is harder than the quest
for a perfect solution. Because if you ask whether the max cut in a graph
has all the edges, That's equivalent to asking
whether it's bipartite. And it's easy to tell if
a graph is bipartite. Okay, So to, to see that
Max 2 SAT is NP hard. We are going to reduce 3 SAT to it. So the idea is we're given some 3-CNF formula and we
have these clauses in it. And so for each clause, and again, x, y, and z here are literals. So one of them could be like the
negation of an input variable. But if I write a negation
of that negation, so we want to turn this 3 CNF formula into a
two CNF formula where it's hard to figure out how
many clauses going to be satisfied or the decision
version would be, you get an integer
threshold and you ask, can at least this many
clauses to be satisfied. So you replace this clause with
these six too literal clauses. Where on each, where these three iterate over
every pair of literals, and these three iterate over
every pair of negated literals. Okay? And the key idea, we're not going to
talk through it here, but it's, it's just a
straightforward case analysis. Is that any assignment that
satisfies exactly three or five, there's any assignment has to satisfy exactly three or five
of these clauses, depending on whether it NA ie
satisfies x or y or z, right? There's no way to satisfy
any number other than that, assuming that you have at least a one in this clause and also at least a 0
somewhere in this clause. And that's just a
straightforward case analysis on the six different
assignments to x, y, and z that can make this have
one true and one false literal.