So another completeness
as a surprise result. Remember I DO fan tiny equation is an equation where you asked
for an integer solution. And famously asking this for general multivariate
polynomials is undecidable. It was proven in the seventies, but we could restrict what
patent equations we ask about. So a linear diaphragm
time equation is just a linear equation
where you're given as input natural numbers a, b, and c. And you want to know, are there natural numbers x and
y that make this equation true? And it turns out this is NP. Pause and think about
that. Why is that true? Well, if you think about
the number theory of this, you would need that the
greatest common divisor of a and B should also divide c. And that's precisely what the so-called extended
Euclidean algorithm gives, gives you x and y, such that AX plus BY equals
their greatest common divisor. So we're not going to get
into the number theory that, but it is possible. I just want to point
out that it's possible. So now what have we get a
little bit more polynomial, but not general polynomials. So instead of x and y are
just these linear terms, what if we allow one
of them to be squared? So a quadratic dial phantom
equation, coefficients a, b, c. We want to know, can you find natural numbers to
make this quadratic equation true? Turns out this is NP-Complete. So we're not going to
prove this in class. I just wanted to throw
it out there again as an example where the
details sometimes really matter for exactly
how hard a problem they can make a huge difference. Okay, So we are going to focus
a little more on this one that takes us a little bit away from the discrete math that we're used to. But I kinda like it because of its connection to some
other areas of science. So here's a question about integrals
that we might want to answer. It's just call it cosine integration. So we have a special formula
that we want to integrate. And it's the product of the
cosines of a bunch of angles. And in fact, the angles are
all related by these integers. So your input is basically just the parameters which has these positive integers,
X1 through Xn. We want to ask, is this
integral positive or not? Okay, So this is something
you'd want to figure out. And our key tool for analyzing this will be
this sort of variant of Euler's famous formula that relates the trigonometric functions
to the exponential function. So cosine of tau is this
exponential function of tau involving imaginary numbers. Okay? So first of all, we get, let me just rewrite this above here
in a more compact form. So we'll just use a product symbol. So we're asking about this integral
and using this formula here, we can substitute in
the numerator up here, and then we just factor
the two denominator out and there's n of them
multiplied together. So we factor of one
over two to the n out and we get that this integral
is this thing, okay? Now, how do we reason about that? Well, it's the product of n terms, each of which is the
sum of these two. So in general, if you have a
product of some number of terms, each one of which is just
a sum of two numbers. In this case, if they're
say, three terms, but two things being
summed in each term, you get eight total terms. When you multiply it all
through one for each way to pick one number or the
other in the final term. So that means if we want to
multiply together these n terms, what we get is all 2 to the n different ways to pick either the un-negated or the
negated exponent, right? These are the same exact number
except for negative sign up here. So here they are out with
the negative terms in red. Okay? So now we can group them in each term by which ones have the negative exponent
and which ones don't. So we can say this is
simply the sum over all possible subsets a from one to n. And then the subset a represents
the positive exponents here. So we multiply together all
the e to the i x j theta terms and then multiply all the e
to the negative i XJ terms, but sort of color it a
little bit different there. Okay? But then here is where
it was useful to use Euler's formula because we're
multiplying together exponent's, I'm sorry, we're multiplying
together e raised to some power, some exponent, which amounts to
adding the exponents together. So we can turn each of these products into a
sum up in the exponent. So each term in here is just
e to the I theta and then the sum over all j and a of x
j minus the sum over all j, not an a of that XJ. Okay? So it's just a bunch of
algebraic manipulation so far, but the key idea was to use Euler's formula to turn
this product into a sum. So that's usually
what it's useful for. Okay, So now just to reminder, this integral up here
equals this thing. This is what we just derive it. We're almost there. The first
thing to notice is you can exchange sums and integrals
because an integral, integral is just kind of like a sum. And now that we have this integral, okay, now we're gonna do a
little bit of calculus here. So let's think about
what to do with this. Well, the key thing to
notice is that if I have the integral from negative pi to
pi of e to the I theta y. But what do we have here? These y's are integers, right? We're summing up integers here. So Y is going to be some integer. So if we're constrain
that y is an integer, then if it's 0, right? Then this integral is
just two pi, right? Because if y is 0, e to
the 0 is just 1 and we're integrating from negative pi to
pi of one, so that's just two pi. But if y is anything else, right? No matter what it is, why does, is why determines how rapid
this frequency changes. But if we're going from Pi, from negative pi to pi, and that's what each,
it's kinda small print, but each of these are going
from negative Pi to Pi. Since y is an integer
worth if it's cosine, we're starting at the top
and ending at the top. If it's sign, we're starting in
the middle and ending at all. And all why is telling us is how
many times do we go up and down. But when you integrate, you know, there's as much above the
x-axis as there is below. So all of these just integrate to 0. So we get this very sharp
distinction, and y is an integer, it at 0, you get two pi, otherwise you just get 0 at this. So in other words, this is
simply a counting problem. No, this, these, the sum of
these integrals. What is it? Well, it's just two pi times
this first term times z, where z is just the
number of subsets. That would make this y term
right here equal to 0, right? So the number of subsets of a from
one to n such that the sum of all the numbers indexed
by something and a equals the sum of all those
not indexed by something today. Which means what's happening. This integral right here
that we care about, is greater than 0 if and only if z, this number of subsets
here is greater than 0. But just saying the number of subsets is greater
than 0 is the same as saying there exists a
subset that makes it true. In other words, if there
exists a subset a, the integer of the possible
indices into these integers, that makes the sum of them inside the set equal to
the sum outside the set. But that is exactly the
integer partitioning problem. Okay, So in fact we didn't
do a reduction airway. It's kind of a two-way reduction. We just showed that the
answer to this question, precisely the same as the
answer to the question. Is it possible to split these
integers into two sets, each of which have the same sum. And we know that's NP complete. So, so this cosine
integration problem. Now why do I find this relevant? Well, it's very common, particularly in
engineering and physics, to assume that integrals for
sort of relatively simple F, These kinds of functions can be numerically estimated by
sampling f at many points. It's usually assume
when you can write down a formula that you
care about in this form, great, you've solved, you
completely understand your system. But the NP hardness
of cosine integration suggests that as long as P
is not NP, exponentially, many points need to be sampled to get an accurate approximation when
that f is this product of cosine, which is considered by most people
who work with these to be a fairly simple sort of
form of the function. So in other words, it
cannot be estimated accurately by these means in
any feasible amount of time, assuming that P is not NP.