Finally, we're going to actually roll up our sleeves and prove that a problem is NP complete without appealing to
circuit SAT or 3 SAT data. And so circuit SAT is going
to be our first quote, unquote natural NP-complete problem. And we are actually
going to appeal to an existing problem being NP-complete and as
witness existence, right? So we're going to show witness
existence is reducible to circuit SAT and recall
witness existence is this problem that's very artificial
looking and we only defined it just to prove that there is
a problem that is NP-complete, but it's going to be
useful in this reduction. So this is given as input a program P and an input x and
then a time-bound. And you want to give
the time-bound so that the input size scales
linearly with the time. And so we give the time
bounty in urinary. So if we want to ask about
Renee NP for t steps, we give T 1's in a row. And the question about this, remember this program is supposed
to be like a two input program, like an NB verifier. The question we're asking is, is there a w a second input
to give B in addition to x? And it's not too
long, it's at most t, such that P annex w outputs, yes, and at most t steps. But recall T is actually
playing double duty here. It's a bound on both the witness
length and on the running time, which when we employed as
they're both going to be some polynomial function
of the length of x. So in other words, to do this
reduction, what does that mean? It means we're going to show
how to transform our input, the Triple P x t into
a circuit C sub p x t. So the subscripts there are going to remind us that although the
circuit takes an input, p and x and t are all sort of
hard-coded into the circuit. Like if X were to change, the circuit would change. But you can think of the input the surrogate takes
as being something like w. So, so the second input to P is going to be like the
whole input to the circuit. So more formally, to show
that this reduction works, it's gotta be the case that P x t is a yes instance
of witness existence. In other words, there exists a W of length at most t. So
the px W outputs, yes. And at most t steps if and only
if this circuit is satisfiable. And more or less, the way it's gonna work is
that circuit is going to be satisfied by the w over a year. So intuitively this works because
circuits can do any computation. So nowadays to us that
sounds kinda like, of course circuits
can do computation. But the insight here is
that Boolean circuits and Turing machines look like they do different
kinds of computation. So to be able to relate them
in this way and to keep the time-bound and the size of
the circuit, how you want. We need to be a little bit careful.