So we talk a lot about
Boolean satisfiability. And it's common to
hear people say, Oh, they Boolean satisfiability
is NP-complete. But what do we really mean? Like I said, I don't like
that the textbook calls the CNF satisfiability
formula just sad because, well, there's one particular
kind and satisfiability. So the convention
I've saved is to use SAT when you mean arbitrary
Boolean formulas, circuit SAT when you mean
arbitrary Boolean circuits, which are more general, 3-sat
to mean three CNF formulas. But there's other flavors
of boolean satisfiability. Or SAT is general Boolean formulas. And a E 3 SAT is one we've seen. This is the question. Is it possible to make an
arbitrary three CNF formula? Have every single clause
have two unequal literals. So true and false both
show up in every clause. 1 and 3 SAT is a sort
of related variant. So the goal of 1 and 3 SAT is to make exactly one literal
true in every clause. So it's even more restricted
than not all equal 3 SAT. And this one is very useful because
this one is still NP-complete, even when you don't have negations. So even when every literal
is just an input variable, the problem of making
exactly one of them true in every clause is NP-Complete. This makes us a particularly
useful one for reductions as well. Now I want to caution and not
everything that you might call Boolean satisfiability
is NP-complete. So 2-SAT we saw is contained in B. So and we saw the algorithm to do that by reduction
to graph reachability. Dnf SAT. So this is satisfiability with Disjunctive Normal formulas, MY name. Formulas that are a big OR of clauses where each clause
is an end of literals. Such as you might get out of a
sum of products construction. If you remember your
digital design course, it turns out that is actually NP. And I may assign a
homework problem on this. And some versions of boolean
satisfiability, they're hard, but they're not NP, complete their hard for
other complexity classes. So majority sat, ask the question, do at least half of all the
assignments satisfy the formula? Writes a SAT is the question, is the number of assignments
that satisfy at least one? Majority sat says within inputs is the number of assignments at
least two to the n minus one. Sharp SAT is the problem of counting the number of
satisfying assignments. So this is not a decision problem. This is a search problem if you
like to look at it that way. So this is the problem to output an integer that says how many
satisfying assignments are there? Now this is, these
are both complete for other complexity classes that we probably won't get to in this course. But you can think of
them as being like the versions of P or NP for the
kind of problem you're asking her. So Sharpie is like NP where instead of trying to
figure out is there a witness, you want to know how many
witnesses are there. That's a Sharpie problem. And so these are at least
as hard as NP problems. If you could count how many
satisfying assignments you can see is that it
is there at least one. But we think actually that
it's even harder to count the number than indicate, is the number bigger than 0 or not. And then PP is this
probabilistic class where you're essentially asking if I were to
assign an assignment at random, would it have probability at
least 1.5 of satisfying the form? So the kinds of problems or you ask, is there at least a
probability a half? Those are so-called PPE problem stands for probabilistic
polynomial-time. Another variant is unique SAT. You want to know, does
the formula I have exactly one satisfying assignment? So if it had two or more, you'd want to say no or at
0, you'd want to say now. And this is complete for a
complexity class called us. And then there's this related one, which is pretty close to unique SAT. It's called unambiguous sat. And this is the problem. You not give an arbitrary
Boolean formulas, you're promised it so that the
algorithm doesn't have to, is not required to do
anything special on formulas, unless the formula has exactly 0
or one satisfying assignments. So it's an easier task than
telling is a formula satisfiable? You're promised an advanced if it is, then in fact there's only
one satisfying assignment. So that might make
the problem easier. And we don't know if this is NP-Hard, but it is NP-Hard via a
randomized reduction. So in other words, if
unambiguous SAT is NP, then that would imply
that SAT is solvable by a randomized
polynomial-time algorithm. That's probably correct. And we think that's not true either. So that's pretty strong evidence that unambiguous SAT is
not contained in NP.