So I said that the textbook avoids being too formal about
what an algorithm is. It doesn't define it as
being a Turing machine. Always. And I do like that, except once in a while when
you want to do approve, it really does help to know exactly
how to model your materials. So we want to show that
Boolean circuits can simulate algorithms
that are NP verifier. And it's going to be really
convenient for this proof if we can say that algorithm is a
single tape Turing machine. So just to review what we mean
by a single tape Turing machine, it's, well, it's typically
defined as some big seven tuple, but the key part is this list of TRH. So here's a transition table same. For example, if the Turing machine is in state q and it's reading a 0, it should stay in state q, right? U1 and move right? So if you did that here, it would change the configuration of a Turing machine to be same state. But it wrote the one over where the 0 was and it move the
tape head to the right. And so if you keep executing, the configuration of
a Turing machine, changes, eventually reach
some final configuration. And depending on whether
it's in state QA or not, you accept or not. Okay, so the key aspect here is that we need to simulate what this
is doing with the circuit. So we need to come up
with a way to represent the entire configuration
of the terrain machine. Not only the bits
written on the tape, but also what state you're in. Where's the tape head? In the bits that are the natural kind of data that
a Boolean circuit processes. So you might say, well, a configuration of the
triple right state, head position and take content. And here they are. So
this is like the triple corresponding to state
q, tape position one. And this tape content, we just write all the
bits until a blank. And you could imagine while the
right part as a binary string, the two left art, but they have some natural
representation as a binary string, if you add at most 16 states, you could represent them
what 4-bit strings. Similarly, the space
usage of the term machine tells you how many bits you
need to represent position. But this is not a great way to
represent it for our purposes. So we could do this, but we're going to represent
in a way that makes it really easy for us to describe how
the circuit is going to work. So here's a more convenient
representation of the configuration. So just as before, we will have our state said is
just going to be represented by binary strings of length log
of the number of states. And then the tape alphabet
could be bigger than just this. But we're going to assume that
are tape alphabet is just 0, 1, an x and a blank. And any computation you want to do, you can do with a tape
alphabet like this. So, so it's going to
be a symbol in 0, 1, 2, the log of the number of
symbols in the tape alphabet. Now the tape head
position will not be represented by just a binary integer. Instead, we're going to
have a bunch of wires, one per tape cell. And that 0 is going to
be on most of them, but one is going to be
on the tape cell or on the new near the cell
where the tape head is. So in other words, we're going to represent a
configuration like this by a string where we write
down the state in binary. And then we write
down the elements of the tape alphabet in this
binary encodings of it. For symbols, we need two
bits for each of them. And then instead of
having a single weight at the position where we can look in the string to
see where's the tape head. We put a one near where
the tape head is. So at the, near the fourth one of these little strings
representing the tape cells. And we put zeros everywhere else. So it's a very sparse representation, will have zeros everywhere
except one position.