So here's a problem that sort of related to predicting something about the behavior of
the cellular atomaton. And the problem is given
a cellular automaton, which again is given
by a function mapping in its neighborhood
states to the next state. And here we're going to
relax the problem a bit. We're going to allow
the cellular atomaton to have more than two states. So Q is it states that it
could be bigger than two. And F is some function describing how to turn your
current set of neighboring states, including your own
into your new state. And you're given a configuration
C and you want to know, does C have a predecessor? In other words, is there
some other configuration P, such that if that wherever
the configuration, the next one would be the
configuration C, we're given as input. So if no predecessor P exists, then c is called a so-called
Garden of Eden configuration. So for example, in the Game of Life, this is a Garden of Eden
configuration, which is not obvious, but this was proven that there is no configuration that if you update at once would
turn into this one. So the 1D version of this problem is contained in P can be
solved as not obvious, there's an exponential number of potential configurations you
might think you have to check. But with some clever
dynamic programming, you don't have to check them all. And sometimes I assign
that as homework. But in 2D, this problem is NP-complete and that's
a whole show right now. And again, this is why I like having a big variety of problems
to choose from that are NP-complete is you
don't always have to reduce 3 SAT or NAT set something. Cas are very geometric
as our timing problems. And so the way the
textbook does this proof is by showing that
trauma know Thailand, which we said was NP-complete,
we didn't prove it. But the, the version
where you only get one tile and it's that
little L-shaped thing. This reduces in polynomial
time to see a predecessor. So what we're going to have
many states in the CA, but our configuration we give as
input will have only two of them, called R&B for region and background. And the idea is that in
the tiling problem work, this is going to correspond to
the region we want to tile. So the tiling problem we're given, we're not given tiles
because the trauma know tiling is just you're only
allowed this triangle. But we are given a region. So imagine the region we were given
look like what's in gray here. Then the CA configuration
of output will be this configuration that has this region set to a
special state here. And we're going to
have an additional CA, state for each Trump that indicates its orientation
and relative position. So for example, if a trauma
0 is oriented like this, then the middle one will
correspond to see a state a, the right will correspond
to see a state B, but then that same part of the trauma will be F when it's
oriented differently. So what the transition function that we designed for the CA is checking, is essentially consistency. So the idea is, how would we make this state? Well, we would make it
if we were able to tie all the region with rotated versions of this tile with these states
set properly, right? And that the whole point
of the transition function is that it's just
going to check, okay, given the orientation
that my state claims, the trauma nose and then again, it can look, right. Every state can see it's whole neighborhood
around it of radius one. So we can see all of them. You can see far enough to see the other two parts of the
trauma know so for instance, if I'm in state age, it means I know that
I'm part of a trauma. Know that I'm in the middle and there's a G above me and there's an eye to the right. So I should check is is if I'm age, is there actually a G above
me and an eye to the right? Similarly, if I'm a C, I should check is there and a above me and a B above and to the right. So you check for that
and you also check some other little local
consistency conditions. And if they're all
met, you say Great. All of us who are in trauma knows we're going to
immediately change to our and any of us who are not in trauma has an a or
b. We're just going to state B. And if anybody finds
an inconsistency, they won't change to our. So only if you can actually tile this region in this way with type tiles that are
properly oriented, where the transition function actually get you to
this configuration.