So with this alternate representation of the configuration
of a Turing machine, that's mostly what you
would expect except that the tape head is sort of
encoded in urinary area. You put a one where it is
and a 0 where it isn't. Now we want to describe at
a high level how to design a Boolean circuit that
will update this to be the next configuration
of the Turing machine. So first we'll just show
how the data is grouped. You have sort of one
subcircuit per tape cell, each one with some bits
to indicate what is the symbol written there and
is the tape that there or not. And you also want to feed the state, and you also want to feed the
adjacent information from the adjacent cells
into the subcircuit because you have to know is
the tape head next to me? If so, am I going to
have the tape at next? Should I pass the
tape had to someone. So we're sort of wired up like this. It's kind of confusing when
you look at it like this, but this shows it's just local. And finally, you want to give the state to all the
subcircuit so that they know what to do based on the
state and the input symbol there. And then it's going to do some processing we'll talk
about in a second and then pass that information out to the next sub-circuit and it's
going to update the state. So intuitively, what's
going on in here. But we're not going to write out
all the N and the NOT NOR gates, but you could write down
gates that would represents, that would do the
computation appropriately. And what would that
computation it have to be? Well, first you'd have to
check if the tape head here. If so, update the tape
contents and the state, right? And this is a Turing machine where
the tape head moves every time. So if it's here now it shouldn't be here next time you change to 0, be otherwise, what's going to happen
with a tape that is not here. So certainly whatever
where the tape contents before these black symbols,
they'll stay the same. Just copy them from the
input to the output. But we also need to
check the neighbors. Try to remember the neighbors
might have the tape it. So this subcircuit right
here might see, oh, there's a one and it's
going to move here next. So if so, set the tape up to one. So that gives you a way to update this row of bits to
represent the next configuration. So here the tape had
moved from where it was to the right and you change the symbol from whatever 000
represents to whatever 11 represents, and you updated the state as well. So this is a circuit that
on input a configuration, the Turing machine outputs the next configuration
of the train machine. So you can put many layers of this same circuit
together and it will sequentially process to give you a sequence of configurations
of the Turing machine. So let's now ask how
big is this circuit? So the subcircuit
for each cell within these little boxes has this
many inputs and outputs. It depends on the number
of states, the number it. Of tape symbols, but it's
a constant independent of the size of the input that the
Turing machine is processing. So you can compute
circuits like this with exponentially in m many gates. So about this many, you can
do a little better than that, but it's about this many so polynomial in the description
length of the Turing machine, which itself is constant with
respect to the input size. And to simulate a Turing machine running for t steps
and using space S, How large to the
surrogate have to be? Well, if it uses space S, We need enough of these to represent all the tape cells
that are ever be used. And we do one layer of this
per time step you run. And remember that if a Turing
machine runs for time t, It can't use more than t space. Because it can at
most movable, right? Once on every time step. So S is at most t. So t times s can just be
replaced with t squared. And this over here is a constant. So the circuit is o of t squared. Description length. Are these number of gates in the number of time-steps
we're going to run for. Okay, So here's how we put all that together to reduce witness
existence to circuit SAT. In other words, to transform
a NP verifier represented by a Turing machine into a circuit
that satisfiable if and only if the ND verifier can be made to say yes with
the proper witness. So the reduction is on input
Px T for witness existence, we output the circuit
C sub EXT of width t, approximately n depth d, that simulates P for t
steps using t tape cells, knowing that's enough cells, if we only run for t steps, maybe we don't even need that many, where there's a W to
make that circuit output one if and only if px W accepts. So it looks somewhat like this. There's the very first layer which says we start
in the start state. Let's say this is the
representation of it. And what's going on here? Well, p takes two inputs. So we imagine that
that's written down on the terrain machine
tape with X and Y, X and W right next to each other. So x is going to be hard coded. So whenever I write these bits here, these are not actually
inputs to the circuit. These are hard-coded
constants, right? And you can, you can either assume your Boolean circuit
model allows constants or there's a way to cook up constants if you have only AND, OR and NOT gates. So those go here. And along with all these other inputs that are hard-coded as shown, then the part that represents the witness is the actual
input to the circuit. So these are the input
nodes to the surrogate. And then we add some blanks to
make the total width equal to t. So imagine we start with the term she has x on its tape followed by W. And maybe there should
be a character between them to separate them, and then followed by blanks to make up the total space
wherever we're going to need. And now, if you put the
right bits for w here, that would make p except x and w, that will make this
circuit output true.