So now on the next section of the textbook called
completeness as a surprise, which indicates sometimes you gotta be careful thinking
about this stuff. We open the course talking
about the difference between Euclidean path and a Hamiltonian path and how they look like
almost the same problem. But one of them is NP-complete, the other one's solvable
in polynomial time. So we're going to see that this
pops up in different contexts. So remember that a cut of a graph is a partition of its state set into
two disjoint subsets, V1 and V2. Sometimes people talk about the edges between V1 and V2 be in the cut, and that's fine to do that, but you gotta be careful because not all subsets of
edges define a cut. So for example, if
we have this graph, we imagine that we
partition in this way. Intuitively the idea is
you like you draw a line that separates the one
side from the other. But you can draw lines
lots of different ways. So the key idea is that the edges that define
the cut, in this case, they're not every edge
of the line crosses, it's every edge that the line
crosses an odd number of times. So this edge is not
in the cup because it crosses at once and
then it crosses it again. Easier just to think about a cut
me in the subset of vertices. But of course we call it cut
because what we care about is cutting the edges
that go across, right? So the, the red highlighted edges
here are the ones in the cut. And sometimes we talk
about weighted graphs. And then the weight of a cut is the sum of the weights
of all the edges. Okay? So there's a problem
that's fairly common to, to study in an algorithms course. The min-cut problem is given a
weighted graph and a threshold pay, you want to know, is there a
cut of g of weight at most k? And this is typically one of the first things you would
study in an algorithms course. You'll learn about the
max-flow min-cut theorem. And you'd show that this is npq. So for example, the
Edmonds-Karp algorithm takes time polynomial
in the size of G. So max cut is almost
the same problem. But instead of asking about, do you have a cut,
a weight at most k, you ask about a kind
of wait, at least K. And it turns out this
is NP-Complete, right? So there's little change in the
direction of the comparison, makes the problem vastly harder. And this shows up in a
lot of other instances we talked about Euclidean bath
versus Hamiltonian path. Shortest path can be solved
by Dykstra's algorithm. But asking about the
longest simple path in a graph is NP-Complete. We saw 2-SAT is easier than 3 SAT. We saw by reduction to
graph reachability, we sought to coloring is
easier than three coloring and coloring is basically just
telling is the graph bipartite. So a greedy algorithm
that tries to color it will actually succeed in figuring
out whether it's so colorable. And remember tiling even
with only one tile, just a trauma, know that
you're allowed to rotate. That problem is NP-complete. Well, no matter what kind
of tile you are allowed, if you only have one tile. But you're not allowed to rotate it. It turns out you can
solve this problem in polynomial time and
sometimes I assign elbow. Okay, so back to Max-Cut. Me say this is NP-complete. So how can we prove it? What we're going to prove
that an even easier version of the Maxcut problem, which is unweighted max cut is NP-complete by reducing that
not all equal 3 SAT to it. So unweighted Max-Cut,
you can think of as just the weight of every edge is one. So you're just counting
what is the number of edges in the maximum cut? And you can, an easy way to
think about that problem. That'll make it a
little easier to think about is you're asking the question, can you color V with
two colors, right? So that represents the partition
on each side of the cut so that at least K edges have
endpoints of different colors. So let's think about it that way. We'll draw a graph here. And our reduction on input a 3 CNF formula is going to
output a graph like that. So if the 3 CNF formula where
this clause and this clause, we would make these gadgets
for the clauses and then we would make these
gadgets for each variable. And if we have n variables and m clauses than the
number of edges here, if you count through this is
going to be n plus 6 app. That's just what you get from
a construction like this, where you have edges between all
the variables appear between the claws nodes and also between each variable node and clause
node that have the same literal. So the k that we're going to set, the threshold for how
many edges should be in the cut is going to be almost that bank is going to be almost
every edge in the graph. It's only going to be n smaller
than the total number of edges. So to have a cut of this size, you need almost every
edge to be included. And we're going to set it up
so that essentially the only way to get a cut of
the size to include every single edge except one edge per clause gadget
inside of the clause gadget. So the idea is that you interpret assigning true and false to the variables as
coloring in this way. So for example, to
set a variable true, you make the left node blue, the right note orange,
and you swap them for making the variable false. And remember you want every edge to connect endpoints of different colors if it's going to be in the cut. So essentially because we're
only going to leave out one per clause node down air. We need to make sure
however we color this, every single edge is
connecting different colors. So the idea is that if x
is set to be true, right? So, so, so what do we mean by
this formula is satisfiable. That means there's at least one
of each value and its literal. So suppose that the two
values we're going to use, our x is one and z is 0. So great that, that works. There's a little set X, have its node here be colored the opposite
of its node up here. And we'll have z here because it
the opposite of its node up here. And then for the third one, we just arbitrarily pick
one of the two colors. But the notice that there's only
two colors we're using here. And this is connected
to this node down here. And Arabia, sorry, we
don't pick it arbitrarily. We said that the opposite of
whatever this is upheaval, right? So we want this node and this
node to be opposite colors. But then that forces this edge to
connect nodes of the same color, which means we should
leave it out of the cat. And then similarly, if
we say not x down here, it gives us our 0 value and y gives us our one
value in the clause. That means we'll take
the third one, the z. We'll set it the opposite of the
variable node it's connected to. So we set it to orange. Because we said it to orange. We can't include this edge in
the cut to this other orange. So this gives us a way to leave out exactly one edge per clause gadget, which gives us the
number of edges we need. And that just proves
one direction that if we can NAPE satisfy the formula, we can color the graph in this way, which gives us our cut
of the right size. And you have to show
the other direction. We won't talk about it here. But the key idea is
to prove that in any, that if there's a cut of size k, there's an NA assignment
to the formula. And it said, if a clause is
assigned to all zeros or all ones, and therefore it's
not an a assignment. Then at most four of
its six edges, right? So the three internal
and the three going out to the variables
can be at any caught. And therefore, you couldn't actually have a cut of size k and neck.