So we've seen that
the trauma know are that the tiling problem
is NP-complete. We were allowed to use to trauma knows which is
the two-by-two square, sorry, two tiles which
it's a two-by-two square and then this other
then we call the trauma. One question is, what's the complexity of just
the traumatic version? So you're given a
region R and now you're not given a set of tiles
or just restricted. The only time you're
allowed is the trauma now, which can be rotated. And you want to know can RB tiled? And that question actually is just
as hard, so that's NP-complete. You can use similar tricks to before to show how to simulate Boolean
circuits with only does, but It's a lot more complicated. So I think the textbook
author interests more actually showed this
in a paper a long time. So even with just one tile, if it's a fairly small
tile but carefully chosen, this problem is equally hard. So is that true? So it's clearly the case that if your tile is just
the one-by-one square, any region can be tiled with that, that the definition
of a region is just, it's a bunch of those
Where's put together. So there is one tile that's
sort of intermediate in size between the trauma now
and the single square tile. And it's the domino, two squares
stacked on top of each other. So the domino tiling
problem is given a region R can be tiled with non-overlapping
copies of the domino. And you might think, well, okay, this one, there's actually some
choice about how to rotate it. So maybe this is NP-Complete as well, but it's not, it's contained in P. So pause for a minute and
think about why that is. So one way to see it is that we can reduce domino tile
into bipartite matching. So note what we're doing
with the reduction AIR. We're not showing a hardness result. We're not reducing some known
hard thing to domino Thailand. We're showing that you can
solve domino tile and by reducing it to something
known to be NP, which is bipartite matching. So it's not obvious that
bipartite matching is NP, but it is, That's the
kind of thing you do in an algorithms course. So how can we do that? How can we show that? So here's a region, and let's imagine labeling each of the points with
a letter like this. And the idea is if recall this little trick
that shows you can't do the, the checkerboard that's
missing two corners with a domino is because each time you
put one of these dominoes down, you can imagine that if the two squares in the domino
are colored differently, then the only way to tile a region is by making it have a
checkerboard pattern like this. So you're asking, okay, what would be the choices here? Well, the choice would be, there's some domino that's going to cover a. The choices is the other half
of that going to cover B, or is it going to cover eat, right? And similarly for all the others. So essentially what
you're asking is if you put this checkerboard
down the nose, have to be how it's
colored when you're done. You know that there's some choice
like the domino covering, hey, can either also cover B
or it could also cover E, but you don't know which one. So what you're looking for is
a perfect matching, right? So in particular, if,
for example, the, the tiles that you want
to choose look like this, that would correspond to
this perfect matching on that bipartite graph.