I don't know. We've talked about Boolean
circuits and Thailand's. And sorry, it's kinda like
formulas a little more general. And remember I said in this section, we're going to just assume
that the circuit SAT problem, which is stated right there, we're just going to assume
that it's NP-complete and use that to prove other
language also NP-Complete. So in particular, we're going
to show tiling is NP-complete. Now by showing that circuit
SAT is reducible to time. And in the reduction we're going to give them read on input a circuit C, we have to output a set of
tiles and a set of points, the region we want to tile with them. And the set of tiles is
always going to be the same. We're only going to use these two
tiles, the two-by-two square. And then this thing called a trauma, which is basically the square
with one corner cut out. But remember we have
all rotations of it. So what we want is to lay down some points in the region that
these are supposed to tile. So that trying to tile that
region with these tiles amounts to evaluating the
circuit C on a particular input. But there's going to be a
little bit a choice about the input that comes from the
choice of which tiles to put down. So we'll get to that in a sec. But to start, we'll define this
thing we call a wider region. So we're going to sort of connect up the various nodes of
the circuit with wires. And the wires are really going to be geometrical regions
in our full region. So this is a wire and
the idea is it can carry one of two values and that's
going to false or true. And that's going to correspond to there being two ways to
lay down this prominent. So as you can see,
there's no way to fit the two-by-two square in any of this. But you could put
the trauma know like this or you could flip it
around and put it like this. And these are going to respectively
correspond to true and false. Shows the wire kinda moving down to the right and
down a little faster. So it's like slope negative 2. There's other directions wires can go and there's actually eight
different directions they can go slope negative a
half or slope positive two. So in general, for all
the different ways that we can sort of point wires and you'll see them in later figure. You see that there's this middle
point of the wider region, the one that's not connected
to either corner here. And when you put the trauma know down in the direction you
imagine the wire Dine. If the, if most of the
traumatized behind that, that point, that
represents the value true. If most of it is ahead of that point, that represents the value false. Okay, so that's how we
build wires between nodes, but we have to start
with input nodes. So this region is going to
represent how we get inputs. So it'll be like a
square on top of a wire. And we're going to
interpret putting the two-by-two square in
there to be true. Why is that? Well, think about how to fill
in the rest of the region. There's only one way. And it's with the pattern of
trauma nose we call true. But you could put
instead of a square, you could put a trauma like this. And then the only way to fill
in the rest of the region. Oppositely oriented trauma nose
and that's the value false. And if you look, there's no other
way to fill this and there's three other rotations
this trauma can have, but they'd all leave something blank. And you couldn't Thailand. So these are the only two ways to actually fill in this whole thing. So that's how we specify input and
start sending it along a wire. But now we want to
perform logic on it. So we're going to show how
to do NOT gates AND gates. And that's enough to get
everything you can get OR gates by combining not an end. So the NOT gate is simpler. We'll start with that. And this region looks
a lot like a wire. It's at this middle part here where it actually is big
enough first square. And this is going to do negation. So let's see why we just
do a case analysis. If the computation is kind of
coming in from the top left, then suppose it's true. Well, what could we do here? We could try to put the trauma know, but this rotation doesn't work, nor does this or this. And this one looks
like maybe it works. Oh, but there's there's no tile
that could actually fill this in. So in fact, the trauma does
not going to work there. The only way to fill it
ends with the square. And then note the constraint. This puts that to fill
in the rest of the wire, you have to use the
opposite orientation. And so you've negated
true and made it false. But now the other case
is what a false came in. Well, it would fill in like this. And then you can see the only
way to keep filling this end is to orient the trauma and
the true configured. Okay, so this can
swap false and true. That's a NOT gate. The end gate is a little
more interesting. But it works on similar principles. If you imagine the two
inputs coming in the top, we're going to enumerate
all pairs of inputs here. So if the first input is false
and the second input as false, again, we have a bit
of case analysis here. We could try putting the trauma know, but this doesn't work or this or
this or this for similar reasons, there's no way to continue
with only those two tiles, but we could put a square
and then fill in the rest. And it's false, which is what
we want for an AND gate. Now we can have false
and true in here. Hopefully it's obvious that
there's one way to fill this in. It's with this trauma now. And then that also is
the false configuration. If we switch around true and
false, this somewhat asymmetric. And yet you can see there's
one way to fill, doesn't? It also makes the
false configuration. But now, if they're both true, they're going to fill in like this. And this. The only way to
continue is to fill in the rest of the wire with
the true configuration. So this is actually
the truth table event. It's true if and only if
both inputs are true. So now we can just
wire them together by placing the inputs
somewhere in the plane. So we can say put a here and B here, and the region is described
just by what I'm showing here. Alright, so this is
the region, right? So this describes if you add
this input to the reduction, you would give this region as
output along with those two tiles. So now let's just see how
to translate witnesses. So suppose that a equals true and b equals false satisfies this
formula, which I think it does. Then that means you
should choose to put a square there and a trauma 0 there. And then the rest of the thing
fills and you gotta NOT gate here. And you notice there's another
gadget I didn't quite describe, but there's a way to kind
of turn of wire so it goes in a different direction
and it really get into the details but works to yet
another AND gate here and here. And, and NOT gate here
and here and an AND gate here and you get this. So how so that's an example. But in general, if there's
an input to satisfy this, then you can choose the right
tiles here to tile this n. And conversely, the only way
to tile this is by choosing inputs that make this the true configuration on the
output wire here. So if this can be tiled, this circuit can be satisfied. Now notice one thing we left out. We did the circuit to be planar. There's no crossings
in the wire here. And if there were, well, it's not really
clear what we do. So this only works if the circuit can be drawn without
any wires crossing. And in general, not every
circuit is like there. There are graphs that
are not planar and they correspond to circuits
that are not planar. So the way to handle this is if you do have a
crossing in your circuit, you can replace it with
a bigger sub-circuit. And you can check that if you want
X and Y to be swapped around, you can replace that with
the subcircuit where you do XORs three times like this. And that will in fact, by businesses, one of those clever little
ways that you can use to swap two variables in a programming language without using an intermediate
temporary variable, you just do an XOR three
times and it swaps them. So this would work except we
didn't describe how to do XOR. So one way is you could
try to come up with a way to describe an XOR
with tiles like this. But the psychiatry just be
done purely within circuits. So this is a homework problem. I sometimes assign. How can you implement
XOR using only AND, OR and NOT gates in a planar way.