The last potholes
study in this chapter, just to show that NP-completeness kinda shows up whether
you go looking for it or not is one of my favorite models of computation
called a cellular automata. So cellular automata as defined
by so-called transition rules. And the idea is that you, you have a bunch of adjacent cells and think of the
kind of like a Turing machine. But it's going to be a
slightly different model. And the ones we're looking at here, just two possible
states, white and black. And the transition rule tells you, if you're a cell like say this one, then based on your color and
the color of your neighbors, What's going to be your
color in the next time-step? So this is saying if you're a
white console or your neighbors, your white in the next time-step, this is Saint of your white and
your left neighbor is white, but you're right neighbor is black, then you become black
in the next time-step. And this one says, if you're black, both your neighbors or white, you stay black and so on. There's eight possibilities
for your neighborhood. And this tells you what to
do in each of those cases. So locally. So it's unlike a Turing
machine and that all of the cells are doing this sort of
computation at the same time. There's not like a tape
head somewhere there. They're all doing this update. So what happens is you start in some configuration and space is
kind of going left and right here. But I'm going to show the evolution of this thing by time going down. And the next time step, applying this rule to every
cell would result in this. And then applying it again and again and again gives you some
sequence of configurations. So formally, a cellular atomaton is just a function which tells you on input a 3-bit bit string consisting of your state
and that of your two neighbors. What state, where you go to next
here I've got caught them 01. And a configuration
is a longer string. If you have n cells, there's a string of length n. You write f of c for the
configuration you get by applying f to each cell
and see, all right, so if this is configuration c, This one is f of c, this is f of f of c. I didn't really say what to
do at the boundaries here. There's kind of a few
different ways you can handle at sometimes
what you do is you assume the left neighbor of this
cell is this one over here. That's a so-called periodic
boundary condition. Sometimes you could say
it shrinks over time. So you could say maybe there is no cell here in the next time-step. Maybe you could say it
grows over time and just everybody becomes 0
when they first appear. Sometimes even talk about
infinite configurations, but we want so standardizing
the order of the input state. Tuples, meaning like this order here, this is lexicographical
order for them means that f can be described by an eight-bit string of
just the outputs, right? So I didn't actually have to write
the top three here if you know, I'm going to give them in that order. I can specify by just saying, what are the eight bits to right ear at top for time
t plus one in order. And so the above is
the string 01111000, which is 30th, and the lexicographical order
of 0, 1 to the eighth. So this one actually has a
name, it's called rule third, it's the 30th site. Well, you can list, okay, you could consider 2D
cellular automata as well. And with the most local neighborhood you can get yourself and
your immediate neighbors. You could say, well, your neighbors
are your eight neighbors edu. And again, you have to describe
based on their colors, what color will you become Next. Now, this is not really feasible
to list all of them, right? Because there's nine
total states here, so we'd have 512 rules to list, but we can list the particular
ones I'm listing here succinctly. And it's called the
Game of Life, right? And the way the game
of life works is by this sort of abbreviated summary, which is, you say, black is alive and white is dead. So if I'm alive, in other words, if I'm a black cell, then if either two or three of
my neighbors are also alive, then I stay alive. But otherwise I die either of
loneliness because there's not enough neighbors or
overcrowding because there's two. Now the other cases I'm
dead, I'm a white cell. How do I become alive? Will live exactly three of
my neighbors are alive. I become a lot, right? So there's just enough of
them to bring me to live. Otherwise I stated. So that's the so-called Game of Life. And people get pretty obsessed
with this one because it's, it's kinda crazy what
these simple rules can do. So Here's a very simple thing. It's not very exciting. A block
queue examine the rule here. If you had these four black and
everybody around them white, this will just stay fixed to keep updating it, they just stay black. Here's another fixed point That's a little better called a
beehive for some reason. So you update does it doesn't change. More interesting is there
are some ones that chain, so you get three in a row and
everyone around them as white, don't change their orientation, but then they'll
immediately change back. Remember, it's like it's kind of
a symmetric rule geometrically. Here's another little more
interesting one called a pulsar. These change but they
kind of stay in place. This is something
called a glider because this one every four transitions and actually moves down into the left and just keeps
repeating like this. And then here is a little bit more complicated one
called a spaceship. And it just moves in step diagonally. It just moves in one direction. And they're symmetric
versions of all of these, because the rules here are
geometrically somewhat symmetric. Okay, So let's just see an example of a particular configuration
of this thing in action. So it's going to start
with a spaceship plot for this thing is doing.
That's what's going to happen. And now in this video, it's inverted. So now alive as white and black. So here is a particular
configuration of lunches spaceships. And remember they're all
going to move to the last. And then we're going to zoom
out and seasonal what's going? Okay, So what happened? Well, essentially this is
a video showing eyelid. The Game of Life is what we
call intrinsically universals, where there's not some work we're going to cover on the
homework or anything, but it has been a pretty
important concept. But one of my research papers
and the idea is that the Game of Life is able to simulate any
other cellular atomaton, any 2D cellular simulation. As you saw in the video, is that there's these very
large blocks of cells, each of which represents a single
cell and what you're simulating. And so the Game of Life can
simulate any 2D cellular automaton, including the game of life. And that's what's being shown here. But then you can simulate itself.