en-ECS 220 1a_1 high-level overview of course topics.txt

So before we get into some of the weeds of the
details of this course, we're going to start with
just a high level overview of some of the ideas we're
going to be covered. So we'll talk about a lot of
discrete objects in this course, and graphs will be chief among them. And remember that a
path in a graph is a sequence of nodes that
are connected by edges. And a cycle is a path that ends at
the same node where it started. And one particular kind of
cycle was studied by oil, or we call them an Eulerian cycle. And this is a cycle that visits every edge in the graph exactly once. So it's worth pausing for a second. Literally hit the pause
button to ask yourself, does either of these graphs
have an Eulerian cycle? Try to find one. Now it turns
out no, neither of them do. And in fact, Euler
proved a theorem that allows us to very
easily characterized when a graph has an Eulerian cycle, it happens if and only if
every node has even degree, meaning an even number of
edges connected to it. Now we can ask a slightly
different question. What if we didn't require
that the path be a cycle? We just want to know, is there a path that visits
each edge exactly once, but it may end at a different
node where it started. And in this case, there is unreal area and path in
G1, but not NG tube. And there's a similar
characterization. It's slightly more complicated
is that a graph has an Eulerian path if and only if all but up to two
nodes have even degree. So on the right, you can see that three of the no, or for the nodes B, C, D, and E have degree 3,
so it doesn't qualify. But on the left, D and
E have degree three, but a, B, and C all have even degree. So that's why there's
an Eulerian path. Now, Hamilton looked at
a very similar question, which is to ask, when does the graph of a cycle that
visits each node exactly once. It might skip some edges. But we want it to visit
each node exactly once. And turns out this graph does, may not be obvious that
there's a path through it. I'm sort of highlighted
the edges there. And we might want to
ask the question, okay, is there a similar simple
to check characterization? Just some simple
property of the nodes. How many edges each of them has. That would tell you when the
graph has a Hamiltonian cycle. It sounds like almost
the same problem. Alright, as Eulerian cycle, we just changed the
word edge to node. So it seems like there should be some similar
characterization that, but in fact, we don't know of him. We don't know of any easy way to check whether a graph
has a Hamiltonian cycle. So let's just think about
these two problems here. An Eulerian cycle visits
each edge exactly once. Hamiltonian cycle visits
each node exactly once. We have this symbol way to
characterize Eulerian cycles. And we can ask, well, if we turn that into an
algorithm that takes as input a graph and then
answers the yes, no question. Does it have one of these cycles? How much time will it take? We'll talk a little more in
future chapters about exactly how we measure the time
needed for algorithms. But it's going to roughly be
something like n squared. If n is the number of
nodes in the graph, kinda depends exactly how
you represent the graph. But the idea is that you
can iterate over each node. There's n of them. And then you can ask how
many neighbors does it have? And in the worst case, you have like an adjacency matrix which would involve iterating over
every other node to ask, is it connected or not? And incrementing a counter. So it would be n nodes. You have to check each
of them takes time and to count the
number of other nodes. And there's more efficient
ways to represent graphs, but it's at most
something like n squared. Whereas with a Hamiltonian cycle, we don't have any simple
characterization like this. The best thing we know
how to do would be to enumerate every single
cycle with EndNote, checking whether it's
a Hamiltonian cycle, meaning that it has each node in the graph
appearing on it exactly once. And if you think about how
many ways are there to, to take the end nodes in
a graph and that sort of permute them and then check
is that a valid cycle? In other words, each pair of
adjacent nodes connected by an edge. Well, there's n factorial
permutations of the n nodes. And n factorial is The
bigger than n squared. It's at least exponential and n. One kind of easy way
to see that is that it's n times n minus 1 times n minus
2 on down to at times 2 times 1. And most of the numbers in
this list are at least two. So that's going to be at least
two times itself and many times, which is what we mean by 2 to the n. So that's a lot bigger,
it's exponential. And in general, we don't know any better way to
answer that question. So we'd like to know, is there a fast way to decide if
a graph has a Hamiltonian cycle? And it turns out this is not
just some one-off question. This is a very fundamental question because as we're going to learn, if there's a polynomial-time
algorithm for this problem, then there are also polynomial-time
algorithms for thousands of other natural important
problems that we also don't know how to solve
in sub-exponential time. At the technical reason
for this is because the Hamiltonian cycle problem
is what we call NP-Complete. I'll define that formally later. And those other problems
are all contained in NP. And if the Hamiltonian cycle problem had a polynomial time algorithm, then all those other
problems, what is, well, that's the importance
of this problem and all the other so-called
NP-complete problems. So we might want to also ask
the question, well, if so, if there's a fast way to
decide the yes, no question. Is there a Hamiltonian
path in the graph? Is there a fast way
to actually find what usually this is what we want
to do in computer science. We're not happy to just know whether there's a solution to our problem. We would like to have the
solution itself like what is the path that visits
each node exactly once. So we call this the distinction between a decision
problem that has a yes, no output versus a search problem. That's generally like
if the answer is yes, what is the solution
integer then yes, if there's a fast way to
solve the decision problem, it turns out there's a fast way
to solve the search problem. The fact that the other implication follows is pretty easy
if you could solve the search problem given a graph, give me a Hamiltonian
cycle if it has one. Well, if you get an answer
out of it, the answer is yes. If you don't get it and answer, the answer to the
decision problem is no, it's not obvious that
decision problems, you know, are, are not any
easier than the search problems. But it turns out yes, it
if you could solve the, so the ostensibly easier
decision problem, you can also solve
the search problem. So here's a related question. Is there a fast way
to check solution? But what if I hand you? And I say, this is a
Hamiltonian path in this graph, is there a fast way to
check if I'm correct? In other words, this is the
distinction between searching for a solution and trying to find it versus verifying somebody's
purported solution. And it turns out yes, there is
also a fast way to do this. Okay, so let's think about
this distinction for a bit. This is going to be very
important to a lot of the course, finding solutions versus verifying that a purported solution
really is a solution. So for this problem of Hamiltonian
path given as input a graph G, we should output a Hamiltonian
path G if it exists. So the verification algorithm that takes as input
not just the graph, but also a suppose a path
that's a Hamiltonian. That the way it works is
you just check that p has exactly and unique nodes where n is the number of
nodes in the graph, right? You just iterate over all of them. Check that they all appear in the, that each of them only appears once, and that each consecutive pair is
actually connected by an edge. So we can think about other types of problems we want to solve
from a similar perspective. So let's consider factoring, which is a very important problem
in cryptography, for example. And one way to phrase
the factoring problem as a decision problem or
as a search problem. Meaning, given an input,
you want to get an output. You could say, well, on an integer and I want to output
the whole prime factorization. But just for simplicity, let's just consider this simpler
case where I just want to output two integers that are both bigger
than one, whose product isn't. Right? And it's worth pausing
for a second again, literally pause to think about, well, why is it that I'm calling
this the factoring problem and not the one that would output
the entire prime factorization. And the idea is, if you could solve this problem, you can just recursively
do it these integers p and q and figure out the
entire prime factorization. Once you get an answer of no, there is no such output. That means that the number is prime. So we don't know how to solve
this in polynomial time either. It's not known to be NP-complete. Most people think it's not, but we don't know how to solve
this in polynomial time. But there is a
verification algorithm, which is if I give you two integers
and they both bigger than one, you can check that their product is, then you can just multiply
them together efficiently. So this is yet another
example of a problem where we don't know how to
find solutions efficiently, but we do know how to verify whether a purported
solution really works. So it's worth contrasting
this with in some sense, the inverse problem to factoring, which is multiplication, right? This problem says given
as input two integers, p and q, output the integer
n such that PQ equals n. In other words, output their product. So this problem can be
solved efficiently. And this is essentially the verification algorithm
for the factoring problem. And the fact that one of
these seems to be difficult, but the other one is
easy is the reason it's useful in public-key cryptography. So, okay, so you
might start to think, well maybe all these problems that we encounter or maybe we don't know how to find solutions efficiently. Well, maybe all of
them have this flavor that even though we
can't find a solution, at least we can check
solutions efficiently, but that's not actually true of every problem you might want to say. Also, Let's consider chess. So let's suppose that the chess
problem is given as input, some board positions for chess
like what appears down here. I want to output if it exists, a checkmate strategy
for the white player. So I don't know much about chess, but supposedly this
board configuration as checkmate for a white
into 162 moons, right? So if white plays correctly air, it will win in a large
number of moves below. What would be the verification
algorithm for that? Like what, what proof could I
give to you that would convince you that white does have
a winning strategy. It really seemed like we
have to play the game. But even then, if I'm plane as
white and your plane is black, you're not going to be
convinced I had checkmate. All I'm going to do is convince
you that you made the wrong move. Maybe had you made different
moves, you might have one. So this is not one of
these problems are we even know how to verify purported
solutions quickly. In particular, the moves white needs to make might
depend on what blackness. So I can't just give a sequence
of moves for white to make. I have to give more like
a fully general strategy. Okay, so let's step back a bit and talk a little bit more about some of the lofty ideas we're going
to cover in this course. So the central theme
will be which problems have a shortcut that leads to a fast algorithm like Eulerian cycle. But we don't have to
check all the possible cycles to see is there one that visits each edge exactly once and which don't
appear to have a shortcut, which ones appear to require exhaustive search like
Hamiltonian cycle. Now many problems,
Hamiltonian path of a cycle, graph coloring Boolean
satisfiability. We'll talk about all
these eventually, although not protein folding. They're all equally hard in the sense that if any of them as an efficient algorithm
than all of them do. So why is that like what
do they have in common? Can we transform one of
these problems into it? We'll talk a lot about this. If there's an efficient algorithm
to find Hamiltonian paths. It turns out there's a lot
broader implications than just, there's some other
mathematical questions about discrete objects
that can be solved. It turns out that if this is true, then there's actually an
efficient algorithm to find short proofs of all the great
unsolved problems in mathematics, for example, the beam and hypothesis. This is one of the reasons
that people say if you could prove that P equals NP, and we'll talk about what, what that means in future lectures. You would have solved most of
the other open problems in mathematics because
you could just run this algorithm to define proofs. So this kinda goes against our intuition that such an
algorithm could even exist. So, is it the case that
mathematics is harder than this, requiring intuition and creativity
to solve these problems. In other words, can we prove
that finding proofs is offered? One question we're
going to touch on is, can one programming language solve
problems that another cannot? And what exactly is a
programming language? You've seen a lot of them. But in this course
we're going to kind of formalize what do we
mean by appropriately. And we're going to
see some examples of very simple systems using
counters and geometric tiles. They can actually do computation. And in doing so, I
want to kind of expand your idea of what exactly we mean by a system that can be programmed to automatically
process information? One question worth asking is, can all problems be
solved by an algorithm given unbounded hamiltonian path? We don't know how to do it quickly, but we do know how to do it
slowly in exponential time. Could we do that with every problem? And it turns out no,
the answer is no. There are certain problems that
cannot be solved no matter how much time you allow the
algorithm to run four. And we're going to spend most of
the course talking about time. But another important resource
to consider is space or memory. How much memory is required
to solve certain problems? And how does this relate to the time required to
solve the problem?-e

en-ECS 220 1a_2.1 problems and solutions.txt

Okay, so we're going to
move into chapter two now and cover some of the basics
of the theory of computation. So we want to start with some definitions about what
exactly is it that we're studying. So we say a decision problem instance is just like an input
to an algorithm. So for example, if you're
given a graph, like, well, I'd say at this graph right
here, you want to know, is this graph Eulerian? In other words, does it have a path visiting each
edge exactly once? Now the decision problem, somehow like a bigger object. It's all possible instances
and their answer. So we can, we often will phrase
decision problems like this. We'll say given, and then we'll
describe the type of inputs. In this case, the type is a
graph g. When we just say graph, we mean undirected graph normally. In the question we want to
ask about that input is, is G or Librarian. Now, another way to formalize what is a decision problem is it's the set
of all Eulerian graphs, right? There's only two answers, yes and no. So if you know the set of all
inputs where the answer is yes, well then you also know all the
inputs for the answer's no, it's just accomplish graphs
that aren't in that set. So this says encodes the entire
decision problem in a sense. And another way that
we often formalize what is a decision problem is we acknowledge that typically
computers are going to be processing these data when they're
encoded as binary strings. And so we would say that the decision problem
is not a set of grass, it's a set of binary strings. But those that under some encoding of graphs represent the
graphs that are eulerian. And this is sometimes called
the language as well. So there's different ways
you could encode a graph as a binary string that can lead to
technically different languages. In this case, I'm showing if we use the adjacency matrix
representation of a graph, where I'm drawing
these binary strings as if they have rows and columns. But really this would
just be like this one right here would be a
single binary string with nine. That's it. But I'm
just trying them to, to help you see where each
row and then the next one D. Now contrast a decision problem
with a search problem, right? Where instead of
answering a question, does a certain type
of solution exists, we want to output
the actual solution. So in this case, the
search problem version of Eulerian path would
be given a graph, find or output an Eulerian path if one exists or report
that none exists. So if you can solve this
problem, of course, this is even better than
solving the decision problem. Another way to formalize what's
a search problem is that it's a function from 01 star to 01 star. And so it's describing this
function f is describing on input a string representing a graph. You want to output a
string represent in an Eulerian path in that graph
or some encoding of the word no, meaning there is no path to be found. And a special case of a function. Whose output is just a yes or no is sometimes called
a predicate, right? So the decision problem can be formalized as a function
similarly to a search problem, but the range would be different. Instead of being all 01 star, there's only two answers, yes and no, and sometimes
we call them 10. And when you see the word predicate, that means a function whose
output is Boolean sense. Okay, so that's a way of
defining what type of problem do we want to solve. But as computer scientists were interested in coming up with
algorithms to solve them. So a problem is solved by an algorithm that computes the function or predicate
associated to the problem. So the formal definition of
algorithm that we're going to use in this class is
actually not so formal. We're just going to say
it's a program written in whatever is your favorite
programming language. And typically, the more
traditional thing to do is to define an algorithm as
being a turning machine. And the textbook
differs discussion of Turing machines until
we've developed most of the basics of computational
complexity theory. Now I want to emphasize that Turing
machines are historically very important and still
relevant to understand. But I also want to emphasize
they're not really required to understand most of computational
complexity or computability. If you have in your head a general purpose
programming language that you'd like to think about, like maybe Python that is sufficient to understand
everything we're going to do. Most of what we're going to
do does not require, it, does not require understanding the low level sort of
definitions associated with say, a multi tape Turing machines. We will talk about them eventually. But for now, we're just going to rely on our intuition
from having programs. Okay, so let's start with
an example of an algorithm, a non-trivial algorithm
and a very old one. It's essentially the oldest
non-trivial algorithm, which is Euclid's algorithm for finding the greatest
common divisor of two. So we write that given
integers a and b, we want to find the greatest
common divisor of a and B. And to see how this algorithm works, we're going to sort of picture
this little geometrically. So here's two integers, 66 and 24. It turns out that their GCD is six. So because six is a
common divisor of these, it happens to be the greatest one, but just any common divisor. The following would be true. Which is that you can take a 24 by 66 tangle and partition it up into
six by six squares, right? So the width of the squares x, so it evenly fits into 24, the height of the squares six, so evenly fits into 66. And notice what's
going to happen here. If we look at 24 heights
along the record, when a 24 by definition is the width. But if we look at 24 height, and then we'll look at another 24. And we're going to ask, well, how many times does 24 fit into 66? We can see it fits once, twice, and then it doesn't quite
fit in a third time, right? It gets cut off. Or another way of
putting that is that the remainder when we divide six. 24 is 1866 mod 24 is 80. Okay, so that's in some sense the pictorial definition
of what mod means. It's how much you were able to fit in the last time when you
couldn't quite fit at all. And so look at what's
going to happen here. Six, because six is a common
divisor of both of these, it's going to fit evenly into 24, four copies of six to 24. And it's going to fit
evenly into the next one. And it's going to fit evenly
into the whole next one. But because it started right here, right at the start of this mod, that gave us 18, because that
is also fits evenly into 66. It has to fit evenly into
this difference right here. Or in other words, that's the pictorial
justification of this statement. That d is a common
divisor of a and B. If and only if it is a
common divisor of both be the smaller number and a mod b, which in this example is, is 80. So this gives us
essentially the algorithm, which is that whatever
is the greatest residue, this is true of any
divisor of a and B. It's also true of the
greatest common divisor. So we know that whatever is the greatest common
divisor of both of these, It's also the greatest common
divisor of b and a mod B. As long as they might
be, it's not actually 0. So we can use that to
implement an algorithm, right? So we want to know what's the
greatest common divisor of a and B. I'd like to assume a
is the bigger one here. So we'll say if a is
less than b, swap them. So now we're going to
assume a is bigger. Well, if a mod b is 0, that's exactly what it means
for B to be a divisor of a. And so we should just return b. B is obviously bees greatest divisor, so it's the greatest common divisor. But if not, we'll then
we're going to want to return the GCD of b and a mod B, knowing that that is equal
to the GCD of a and B. So let's just see it in action. If we want to know what's
the GCD of 66 and 24? Well, we compute their MOD, it's not 0, it's 18s. And now we let 24 BA
and we let 18 BB, and we compute 24 mod 18, and that's not 0 either. We get a remainder of six. So now we let a and B be 800000 six, and now 18 divided by 6 is 3. It's even so it fits evenly in there. So at 0, which means the
last positive number we add here that last version of B, that is sex, that is the GC. Okay, so there's a very
non-trivial algorithm. And we'd like to analyze, Well, how long does it take? How long does this algorithm take, and especially how long does
it take in the worst case, what's the worst possible
numbers we can give to this algorithm that would make
it run as long as possible. We'll talk about that
in the next video.-e

en-ECS 220 1a_2.2 definition of running time.txt

Okay, So we're now
going to look into how to somewhat formally define
what we mean by running time. I say somewhat because
we're going to follow the textbooks convention of being a little bit loose with somebody is, and I'll explain why in a bit. So we're going to measure running time as blue and anywhere else
as a function of the input size. So for example, we could
say an algorithm takes n squared steps on
inputs of size n, right? So it's not a single number
saying how long it takes. It's a function. How big your input? But then that begs the question, what is the size N of an
instance of a problem? For example, if we have
a graph G equals V, the nodes and the edges, That's the type of instance for the Eulerian path
problem. What's the size? Is the number of nodes in the graph. Is the number of nodes
plus the number of edges. A graph can have quadratically
more edges than it as nodes. Is it the length of
the string S sub g, where S sub G encodes the
graph and binary, for example, it could be the adjacency matrix, in which case it would have
exactly VI bits in it. And similarly for other types of problems and other
types of inputs, what is the size N of an instance AB of the greatest
common divisor problem. There's two inputs here, right? A and B. Two integers is the sum
of the two integers. Visit the max of the two. Is that the number of bits we
need to represent them, right? So log base two of a
plus log base 2 of b. And note that those numbers are much smaller than the
numbers themselves, right? By definition, they're logarithmically
smaller, or in other words, a is exponentially larger than
the number of bits you need to. So I'm going to leave these questions here as questions because
it's sometimes not obvious. Normally, we're going to
say that the right way to encode an integer is
in binary, right? And therefore, we would
say the size is the base two logarithm of
the integer itself. We're going to see
some reasons why for other decisions like
counting number of nodes in a graph versus number of edges versus number of bits
to encode the whole graph. It would matter in
an algorithms class when you want to get precisely
to how long it takes. But in computational
complexity theory will often give ourselves
permission to sorta, consider all the different answers we'd get in all those
different cases, roughly equivalent to jump. Okay? So if we have some notion
of how big our input it is, Here's how we formally
define running time. Well now we talked about how
to define the inputs is, but we want to measure the number of steps that the algorithm takes
on an input of that size. And what's a step? Again,
this is something aware. If we were in an undergrad class, I would just formally define it. I would say our model of computation is a single tape Turing machine, or maybe a multi tape Turing machine. And it's the number of
steps it runs into you. But I want to try to point
out that there's not one exactly right
answer to this problem. It kinda depends what. Since we've said, are, our notion of a model
of computation is just going to be whatever your
favorite programming languages. Because the claim of the theory of computation is to be able to give universally correct
answers to questions regardless of what kind
of computer you're using, regardless of what programming
language you're using. You know, it's not as easy to
define it formally in the sense, but there's some good
rules you should follow. Essentially one step should
be something like an atomic or a basic line of code
in an imperative program. So for example, an assignment
statement like a equals 4, we would generally think
of this as being a single. It takes constant time. We might say an assignment statement like a equals B plus C
is one line of code. Is this reasonable? Well, it kinda depends exactly
what you're trying to study. Adding B and C together might take awhile depending
on what you're trying to, if you're trying to study the exact number of steps
needed to do addition, you want to take into account, well, what if B and C are both
arbitrarily large integers as Python allows, well then it might not be okay
to say this is constant time. If I have a string
literal like ABCDE, assigning it into a variable
should take constant time. Um, and so we'd call that one step. Doing a Boolean check
like is a less than b. Again, normally we
would say something like this takes constant time. Now if those are very large
integers, it might not. But usually stuff like this. We'll say this counts as
one step of a line of code. So definitely things that
are not allowed, I can't, can't quite draw an
exact perfect line around everything that is alive. But we can definitely say something should not be considered
a single atomic step. So Python allows you to do
list comprehensions like that. So you could assign this
variable equals this list. What does this list? It's
constructed by running a for loop. The for loops inside the
definition of the list, this iterates over all integers
between 0 and n minus one. And if n is very big, this is going to take a while to run. So it's one line of code, but it would not be fair to call this a single step of the algorithm. If your one line of code
calls a subroutine that you had better take into account how
many steps that subroutine takes. Maybe this subroutine
runs for a long time. If your line of code
calls a library function, again, that's just
another subroutine. Maybe it's not one you wrote. Maybe it's one that's in the library, but it may not be okay to
call this constant time. Now, definitely if we have a very formal model of computation that's very
simple, like a Turing machine. Most people would
agree one transition of a Turing machine
counts as one step. If you have other models like a cellular automaton
for, for example, defined by an update rule, you might say one execution of
the update rule is one step. What about non imperative
programming languages, like a functional language
or a logical programming? Here you can't even talk
about steps because the, the method of execution
of these programs is not done imperatively
one step after another. There is an algorithm running in the background that you don't, right? That's the thing that the
interpreter does on your code. So for these, it would actually
depend on how the interpreter works and you'd have
to know more about the programming language to know
how long something will take. Now, we're not going to worry too much about the precise
definition here. And the reason is that much of
computational complexity theory just acknowledges that
we can only hope to get these sort of
universal truth about computational running time Up to
polynomial differences, right? So if you have one programming
language versus another, or one version of these
rules versus another, it might make a polynomial
difference that might cause you to say one algorithm is time n squared, while the same algorithm in another language might
be time in queue. And because we're already going
to make ourselves okay with saying that n squared and n cubed are close enough to both
be polynomial there vault, much more efficient than exponential. We're not going to worry
too much about this, but I'm just giving
you some guidelines for sort of what would be reasonable.-e

en-ECS 220 1b_2.2-1 time complexity of GCD, factoring.txt

So with a somewhat formal definition of running time in order we can come back and we can analyze the time complexity of this
Euclidean algorithm that we defined. So there's the code in Python
for the Euclidean algorithm. Now the input is a pair
of integers a and b. So we have two inputs,
so we got to somehow combine them to get one input size. And we're going to say the size N is the number of bits
of a and B together. Let's just, for the sake
of making this easy, ease and they both require, and that's if b is much
smaller, maybe it doesn't. But you can imagine padding it with zeros until it also requires it. So What we're gonna do is we're just going to count how
many divisions we need, right? So on an input of size n, we're going to say we
need d of n divisions. And how will that turn into the time? Well, if we know that
each division takes time T of n on inputs of size n, then the total time complexity
is going to be T and N times d. And we're going to analyze this
is with a couple of exercises. I won't work it out here, but we can talk about it in
discussion that we need. So the first to think about and stop and think about
this for a second. Try to see why it's true. If a is bigger than b,
bigger than or equal to b, then a mod b is less
than a over 2, right? No matter how a and B are related, you take a mod b and the result
is less than half of it. The other thing to think about is that we can look at this algorithm
air and use this first fact and get that Euclid's algorithm
is going to perform at most to log a divisions, right? And because log of a is, and that's how we're defining
it as two n total division. So a linear number of divisions. And if we use the sort of grade
school algorithm for division, this whole thing that is
going to take o of n squared. And that's a problem in the textbook. Okay? Let's go to a different
problem for factoring, right? So the factoring problem is
going to look like this. We'll formalize it as our
input is an integer m And its size is going to be
log base two of n, right? We'll call that number n. So m is about two to the n. All right, we're going to
say that the factoring problem is to find some factor of atom in the range of integers
between two and n minus 1. If it exists, maybe n is prime, then it would have no such factor. But if it does exist, we just want to find one of them. So one thing to think
about and seriously, pause for a second
and think about this. Why is this enough to help us find
the whole prime factorization? The sounds like a lot crush. This is we're not getting the
whole prime factorization. We're not even necessarily
getting a prime factor, we're just getting some factor and good if the PH composite as well. But just think for a second how
you would use an algorithm for this problem to actually get
the whole prime factorization. Okay, so here's the obvious
algorithm to try to solve this problem. Find factor. And this is sort of Python code and my pseudocode looks
a lot like Python, but I give myself deliberately to just do straight up
pseudo-code sometimes. So what we're gonna do is just
search every potential divisor d in this range between two and
the square root of m plus one. We're going to check what
happens when we divide by d. Do we get a remainder 0 or not? And the claim is that
that's enough to tell if there's a factor in the range
from two up to m minus one. So that's worth thinking
about for a second. And then we just say, okay, if any of those potential divisors divide m cleanly with no
remainder there divisor, so we can return that number. It would be a factor that case. Okay, so again, using
our sort of metric as the number of divisions
being the key thing here. And then we can just multiply that by the time needed to do divisions. How many divisions? What happened here? Well, it's
fairly simply a for loop. It has about square root of m terms and each one we do a single
division to get this mod. So we're doing square root
of n divisions, which is, now remember we have to express this as a function of our input size, as our size is not, our size is the number of
bits needed to represent. So we needed log of n
bits to represent m, which is n. And so m
to the 1.5 is the same as 2 to the n to the 1.5, which is two to the n over two. So this is the sort of naive
way to try to do factoring. Now the best-known algorithm is a thing called the number field CVE. And it's quite a bit faster than, rather than raising two to a
power that's like linear in n, u raised to a power that's something
like the cube root of that. So it's significantly faster, still exponential time technically, but better than the naive them. And it's believed by many people, not everybody but many people, that there is in fact no polynomial
time algorithm for factoring. There is an order n cubed
time quantum algorithm.-e

en-ECS 220 1b_2.2-2 asymptotic notation.txt

So to wrap up this section, we want to talk about
asymptotic notation, which is how we sort of
simplify our method of counting the number of steps
that an algorithm would take. We're not really going to write down the exact number of steps
that an algorithm would take on an input of size n.
And we're going to write something kinda close to it and
much simpler to write down. And for this we'll
use big O notation. So if we write that a function T of n equals big O
of a function f of n. What does it mean? Well, intuitively, it
means that the function t is less than or equal
to the function, right? I put it in scare quotes because functions take
many different values. T could be bigger than f on some values and smaller
than on others, or which one would be bigger, right? This gives us a way
to compare them and say one is roughly
less than or equal to. So if we were to be more proper, we would just write t equals o of f n here is not a variable that
actually comes into it. We're just comparing the
function t with the function f. But often we write 0 of
f of n to sort of remind ourselves that this
is a function taking as input a single number
that we call Han. That's the size of our
input to the algorithm. So and to be even more proper, well, the equals is sort
of misleading here. We're not saying that o of f is a function and it's
the same function as t. Technically, if we wanted
to formalize this, we'd say O of F is
a set of functions. The set of all functions
that are upper bounds for t and t are that are upper bounds for F and T is contained in that set. So this would be sort of more proper, but we don't write that and
nobody else writes that. They write T of n equals o, right? Okay, So if intuitively this means
t is less than or equal to f, Well, we'd like to have a
notation for strictly less than, and that's what we
use little low for. So if I write T is big O of f, it means F grows at
least as fast as T0. This means f grows
strictly faster than t. Formally, we would
say that the limit as t goes to infinity of T of
n over f of n goes to 0. This is how we can formalize that. And we can say that T is big O of f if and only if f is not
little o of t, right? Which is somehow obvious if
you use this analogy, equals, because t is less than
or equal to f if and only if it is not the case that
f is strictly less than d. So here are some examples of functions that are big
O of other functions. So three n squared is big O of n
squared, right? Three and square. It is technically bigger, but only by this constant factor. So we can say it's big
O of n squared there. Asymptotic growth rates are the same. N squared is big O
of three n squared. Obviously because three n squared grows even faster than n squared, a 100 n-squared is actually
little low end of that 2.1. In other words, no matter how big a constant you have out in front, it can't compare to having
a bigger exponent, right? So any bigger exponent
than two above, and that's going to grow
faster than n squared. So similarly, end of the
2.1 is little o of n cubed. And finally, this is a rule or memorizing any polynomial
function of n, including with a huge
exponent like n to the 100, that's a little low of any
exponential function of n, such as two to the n and 2 to
the n is little-o of 2 to the 3. Be careful here. The,
these look like they're within a constant
because of that three. But that constants
up in the exponent. It's not being multiplied
by the whole function. It has been multiplied
in the exponent. And so another way of
saying that is that two to the three N is 2 to the n, and then that whole thing, Q, right? So if you take any
function and cubit, the cubed function
grows strictly larger. Okay? So formally we can say T is big O of f if and only
if there's a constant c. So that for all n, T of
n is at most c times f. This is one way to
formalize the definition. And we also have a
notation for equals. And again, this doesn't mean equals. It means like equivalent. Things can be equivalent
but they're not the same. So we say T is big theta of f if and only if,
well, think about it. If you had a way to
define less than or equal and greater than or equal, how could you use that
to define equals u? Well, you would say
it goes both ways. We say T is big theta of f, of t is big O of f, and f is big O of d. So this means they
grow at the same rate, so they're roughly equal. And we also have this notation
for the other direction of these, we say T is big Omega of f if
and only if f is big O of t. Intuitively, t is greater
than or equal to f, and little Omega means
strictly greater. Essentially, we say
T is little Omega of f if and only if f is little o of t. Just swapping them are. Now, here's an exercise
to see if you're following what's happening here. If we say f of n is big O of log
N. Normally when I say log of n, I'll main log base two
of n. But here I'm going to claim actually that
could be some other base. It could be log base e, then that could be log base ten of n. And I don't think we need to bother writing the
base of the logarithm. Why is that? Why is it that f of n
would be big O of any of those logs no matter what the
bases. So think about that.-e

en-ECS 220 1b_2.3 intrinsic complexity.txt

So we're going to discuss a bit, a conceptual theme that sets sort of theoretical
computer science apart. And it's this notion of
complexity and where it lives and the distinction between a problem and an algorithm
for the problem. So let's consider the
algorithm that we all learned in grade school to
multiply numbers together. So if you have two n digit numbers and here will be the
size of our input. The grade school algorithm says that for each digit
in the bottom number, why you're going to make a row? And each of those rows all have about the number of digits of the top. So you're going to have
n rows of the n digits, each that size n squared. And making each of the digits is a constant time operation that's just adding together
a couple of digits. So the total time to do
this is o of n squared. Now, it might seem like
that's optimal, right? You might have learned this in grade school and blah,
blah, blah, yeah, that's obviously the only way to
multiply integers, but it isn't. So here's a better
algorithm from the sixties. And the idea is it uses
a clever recursion. You take x and y, can you split them up into
two equal size pieces. Size here, meaning the length
in bits or hi In digits. So if X here is about 1 trillion, you split it into two
sequences of digits and you get a is about 12 thousand, b is about 67 thousand, and similarly is split up y and a, C and D in this way. Okay? So if we want
to look at how do we express what x and y r as a function
of these two smaller numbers? Well, you just take
a and you left shift it by n over 2 and
add it to be right. And what is left shift
in, in base ten? That means multiplying by 10 for each digit you want
to shift to the left. So x is 10 to the n over
2 times a plus b y. Similarly for C and D. So x times y is then this expression, that's x times this expression. That's why. And if you multiply
that out first, outer, inner last, you get this
expression for x times y. So it looks like what we've said is that while to
figure out x and y, you have to do four
multiplications to get AC, AD, BC, and BD. And if you crank through, how much time would it take to do four multiplications on numbers
that are N over two digits each. It wouldn't really say
at anytime that would still be n squared total. But we can notice, well, if you had a plus B times C plus D, this other number that hasn't
shown up yet, if you had that. And multiply that out and then
subtract off two of the terms, AC and BD, which we're already
going to need to calculate here. You get the other two
numbers added together, AD plus BC, right? So in other words, by doing only three multiplications, AC and BD, and then a
plus b times c plus d. And each of those are an
n over two digit numbers, along with a constant number of additions and
subtractions to get them. And a couple of shifts, which are a lot faster. Those take only linear time to
do the additions and the ships. You get it right, so we can
save one multiplication. We cut from four down to three. So if you work through the
time complexity of this, well, it's a constant number
of linear time operations, which is O of n times three
multiplications on N over two digits, digit numbers, which recursively
we can express as T of n over 2. T of n is the total time. And if you solve that recurrence, you get that this is instead
of being o of n squared, it's O of n to the log base 2 of 3, and that's smaller than
2, it's about 1.6. So in other words, we get an asymptotically better
algorithm with this recursion. Now, this isn't the best
possible thing to do. It's been known for a
long time that using something called the
fast Fourier transform, this can be done in time
n log square root 2. Then very recently, this was about
a year ago, it was discovered. There's an algorithm that can take
time o of n log n. The obvious lower bound is omega of
n because you have to read all the digits and it's
actually an open question. Is there a linear time
algorithm for multiplication? This is not know, but I
wanted the others is not a class on algorithms or on
multiplication algorithms. I want to use this to
highlight this idea that the grade school
algorithm seems very natural. It seems like obviously
the best way to do this. And it takes time. N squared over n squared is not the time complexity
of the problem. The problem itself has an
intrinsic time complexity. And the grade school algorithm, even though it's the
first way you learn to do this, does not meet it. And this is just sort of a sociological phenomenon
I've personally noticed, which is a very strange thing, which is that it seems to be that the better a person
gets at programming, the worse they get at
understanding this concept. Somehow like very
talented programmers tend to suffer from this belief that the very first
algorithm they thought of for a problem must
obviously be the best one. And it's not until
you really dig into theoretical computer science that you have this insight that NeuroNode, just because you thought
of an algorithm, doesn't make it an optimal algorithm. The problem itself has
some optimal algorithm. And it's our job to discover it or, you know, to prove that the best ones we already
have actually are optimal.-e

en-ECS 220 1b_2.4 the importance of being polynomial.txt

So we've talked about
how we're going to study the time complexity of problems. And we're going to focus a lot
on polynomial running time. It's natural to ask why. Well, let's try to
motivate it in this way. Here's an algorithm for
finding out whether a graph G has an Eulerian path
or not based on the shortcut, characterized by the number of nodes. So you just loop over every
node in G and you ask, is it's degree odd or not? And if more than two
nodes have odd degree, it cannot have an Eulerian path. So what's the running
time of this algorithm? Well, the easy part is that the loop executes n times n
nodes in the graph. Okay, That's easy. The hard part is, well,
how long it'll take, and it depends on the time complexity of evaluating this statement
right here, right? So this if check right here is essentially calling a
subroutine degree of the node. How do you figure out
the degree of the node? Well, now it kind of depends
on your representation. Do you have an adjacency matrix? And then it would be
linear time because you'd have to go over an entire row, that adjacency matrix of
length n to count the degree. It could be more if the matrix
lookups are not even constant Time. If you have an adjacency list, it could be constant
time because you can maybe store the number of neighbors. So this could make a difference. So we're not going to
dig too much into this. I just want to point out, you can make what appear to be
minor differences in modeling choices and have an effect the exact running time
of your outer butt. These choices generally
are going to affect the running time measurements by
no more than a polynomial factor, like most of these kinds
of choices you could make, or just a linear
factor, they might add, you know, a multiplicative factor n, But they tend not to do
much more than that. But even more extreme choices often
have a polynomial difference. Maybe your algorithm runs and squared slower than it would have
under some different choices. Okay? So one lesson to draw from that is 0. If you're really trying to
get the best algorithm, you should be careful in
how you make these choices. But another lesson
we're going to draw to motivate computational
complexity theory is that if our goal is to understand the fundamental properties of
computation and not artifacts, that particular modeling choices. Then we should consider equivalences and running time up to
a polynomial factor. If we want to say that what
we're going to discover is true about all computation than we had better not make these fine-grain
differences otherwise that would be true in some
models and not others. So you often hear this quote
attributed to Dykstra. I don't think he actually
said it, but it's that computer science is no more about computers than
astronomy is about telescopes. And I don't totally agree with that in a lot of it is about computers, but I think what
they're trying to get at there is when we're doing
the theory of computation, we're not really studying the
exact computer you have in hand. We're trying to figure out what is true of any computer you could build, either the ones you are now, the ones you own yesterday are
the ones that might be invented. All right, so I kinda
like this quote from the textbook a little better. Which is rather than
studying the guard grinding lenses and mirrors, let us now turn our
attention to the stars. Okay, so we're going to encounter our first so-called
complexity classes. And these are going to be
sets of decision problems. Rights of the textbook
just says this. It says P is the class of problems
solvable in polynomial time. Okay? So that's a little and precise. I do like to be a little more precise than the
textbook. Some takeaways. So first I want to acknowledge that the way most people
talk about the class P, they consider to be a set
of decision problems. And there's lots of
interesting things you can do in polynomial time, like multiply integers, but
those aren't decision problem, so we don't technically
say they're NP. So the way we tend to formalize decision problems is they're
subsets of 01 star two. We say one such subset, which is a language or decision
problem, is contained in P. If there's a program
Q and a constant c. So that for all possible
binary strings x, when you run q on input x, it halts in at most length
of x to the c steps. That's the polynomial-time part. And q of x outputs one if
and only if x is an a, that's the correctness part. That q here is actually
deciding the language. Okay, our next complexity class
gets a little more fine grained. Instead of just saying you have
a polynomial running time, it talks about closer to
an exact reading time. So if you have a function
T that the time-bound and takes as input a
length of a string and it outputs the worst-case
running time on any string of that length than time of T of n as the class of problems
solvable in time. Big-o of TEA that, alright, so here we're using the
kind of non sharp version where the time doesn't need to
be exactly t of n or smaller, it could be 3 times T of
n or 10 times d of them. Okay, So with this
complexity class in mind, or rather this infinite
family of classes, we can express P as
being the union over all constants C of time
of n to the c, right? So these are all the possible
polynomial time bounds. And n squared, n cubed, n to the fourth and so on. And when we write Pali of n, This is often shorthand
for Big O of n to the c, for some constant c, right? So this is generally what
do we want to be lazy and we don't want to work out
exactly what the constant is, but we want to say, okay, if you did a little more work, it figure out the constant. Maybe it's seven, and
we would have just proven it's O of n to
the seventh, right? So under this sort of
more loose notation, we can say P is time
of poly of n, right? All right, and then the last
complexity class here is x. This is exponential running times are rather that the problems
decidable in exponential time. So this is time of two to the
poly-A than or more precisely, the union over all
possible constants C of the problems decidable in
time two to the n, to the c. Okay? So those times are bigger than
polynomial running times. They're actually strictly bigger. But for now we won't
worry about that. We'll just observe that for every
possible constancy, a hundred, ten hundred million n to the c is big O of 2 to the n.
It's actually little, it's also a little low,
but all we need here is that two to the n grows at least
as fast as any polynomial. And so, just to restate that
in set theoretic language, it means the set P, the set of decision problems
solvable in polynomial time, is a subset of EXP, those that are solvable
in exponential time.-e

en-ECS 220 1b_2.5 tractability and mathematical insight.txt

So the textbook makes the important observation
that the difference between polynomial and
exponential time is one of kind, not a degree, meaning essentially
it's a huge difference, it's not a minor difference. So remember, p is the class of decision problems solvable
in polynomial time. Now you'll often hear
this paraphrased as being the tractable
decision problems, meaning the ones that in practice, we can solve efficiently according to our standard intuitive notion
of what does efficient mean? It needs, it runs and halts by
the time you need the answer. Now, worth observing, and this
is a very common objection to hearing that theoretical
computer scientists obsess over this class P a lot. Which is that, yeah, not all polynomial time algorithms
really are tractable at the end of the 100 time algorithm
is not an efficient algorithm. It does not in general
hall, when you need it to, It would never halt in your lifetime for even
modest values of that. Okay, so given that, why do we care so much
about this class peak? What's the point of
thinking about it? Well, for one, there's sort of
a one way implication here, which is that if you can
show a problem is not in P, This generally does
imply it's intractable. If the best algorithm
you have doesn't even run in time and the 100, well then of course, there's no good algorithm
for that problem. So this is worth studying just for, for this kind of insight. But what's the real goal of studying? And it's that it tells
us something about the mathematical insight
into problem-solving. When you show that a problem is in P, generally means it has some
special structure that allows the algorithm to avoid an exponential time
brute force search. So once this insight is made, once somebody proves that a problem has a polynomial
time algorithm, other insights tend to follow and so do even more efficient algorithms. One example of this
for me is when it was discovered in 2002 that there's a polynomial time algorithm for determining whether an
integer is prime or not. If the integer has n bits, I think the original algorithm took something like time n to the 12, and it really wasn't practical. The randomized
algorithms that already existed that gave a good
answer with high probability, vastly outperform this one. And they were obviously the
thing to run instead of this. But after the original
paper was published, once people saw the insight
that had been made, they were able to work
on that and improve it and got it down to
time n to the sixth, which I think is
still worse than the, the existing randomized algorithms, but it was a lot better. And maybe someday somebody will
follow up on those insights and get like an n squared time algorithm
or a linear time algorithm. And we think that some
problems in this class, NP that we're going to talk
about in the next chapter, do not have this structure. We think, in other
words, P is not NP. And proving that is more
or less the top goal of theoretical computer
scientists in order to take advantage of this
observation right here, that if you can show
a problem is not NP, yeah, that really means
it's intractable. You're not going to be
able to solve it with an efficient and exact
always correct algorithm. Okay, So that wraps it up for
chapter two. Chapter three. We're not going to
cover it explicitly. It's a good chapter. It's a very good review
of essentially what you would cover in an undergraduate
algorithms textbook. So because ECS 120 to a is a
prerequisite for this course, we're not going to go
through this in lecture. So I'm going to assume
that everybody is familiar with the techniques and
the terminology from Chapter 3. But just in case you haven't
taken algorithms in a while, it's a good idea to review,
especially the following. Definitely we're going to
make heavy use of recursion. That section 31, divide and
conquer and dynamic programming. There's going to be a lot
of graphs in this course, we're going to talk a lot
about graph reachability, including breadth-first,
depth-first search, which I'll just assume that
you understand very well. And we're also going to allude to a few other more complex
graph algorithms like shortest path,
minimum spanning tree. And we're not going to dig much knew exactly how those algorithms work. But it is going to be important
for you to understand that each of these problems has a
polynomial time algorithm. And finally, reductions are going to be at the core of a
lot of what we do. So be sure to review
Section 38 as well.-e

en-ECS 220 1c_4.1 needles and haystacks.txt

But we're going to start with
a high level level overview of this class, NP. We've been doing a lot
of high-level overviews. We're going to get
detailed after this. But Let's remind ourselves about this decision problem
called Hamiltonian path, which is the problem given as input, an undirected graph G. Does
G have a Hamiltonian path, meaning doesn't have a path that
visits every node exactly once. Now, it's often said it's hard
to find a needle in a haystack, and we can use that metaphor here. The needle research 84 is the
Hamiltonian path if that exists, and the haystack is somehow the set of all
paths. So we might consider. Now there's an obvious algorithm
to solve this problem. You just look at all possible
paths in the graph and check whether each one
is Hamiltonian or not. But that takes a long time. So we did see that it's possible to quickly check whether a given
path is Hamiltonian or not. And that somehow captures the
essence of this class NP. And formally, we'll define a
decision problem to be an empty if, whenever the answer
for an instances yes, like for Hamiltonian path, the instance would be a graph
that has a Hamiltonian path. There's a simple proof of this fact. In the case of this problem, the simple proof is the path itself. Now in general, what we mean by simple proof is that given the proof, it's checkable in polynomial time. There's an algorithm that
can look at the input, the graph, and the proof, the path and tell whether that path is a Hamiltonian
path in that graph. Note the asymmetry of this definition that talks
about yes instances. It's not necessarily
the case that there's a simple proof in the
case of The answer is no. And think about that
for Hamiltonian path. If I try to prove to you, here's a graph and I claim
it has no Hamiltonian path. How would I prove that? What short string, good, I give to you that once
you've checked it, you would believe there's no path visiting each node exactly
once. Not obvious. Okay, so before we
formally define and B, let's think a bit about
this distinction between P, the problems where I can give a yes or no answer in polynomial
time versus NP, where I can't necessarily do that. But if somebody gives me a potential solution that they
claim means the answer is yes, that can be checked
in polynomial time. So suppose that I
know a problem is NP, it has a polynomial time algorithm. Is there also in NP was worth
thinking about for a second, pause if you want to. So what would be the easily
verifiable proof in that case? Well, it would simply be
the algorithm itself. You have a polynomial time
algorithm that can tell whether a is or whether an instance
is in the language a or not. So if I claim the answer is yes, I can simply give a transcript
of the computation of that algorithm on the input
and you could run it yourself. You could just go
through and verify yep, each step is the next
step you would get by running the algorithm and
then verify that at the end, the algorithm actually says yes. Okay? So that means every problem that's contained in B is
also contained in NP. Or the set theoretic way
of expressing that is, P is a subset of NP to all the problems that
can be solved quickly, can be checked quickly. Checking is like an easier thing to do because you get this
extra information, right, the potential answer. So the P equals NP question is about whether that inclusion
is proper, right? Is NP contained in B? In other words, are they equal? Or is there a decision
problem in NP, but not NP? And this is my notation for
set difference here, right? So if np set minus p
has something in it, that's a problem where
you can check solutions efficiently but you can't find
them were given no solution. So every problem in
NP can be solved by a slow algorithm that exhaustively searches all
of the possible proofs. Part of the definition of NP is that the proofs have a certain
bound on their length, so there's only a
finite number of them. But p is this very special
subset of NP for which some mathematical insight lets us avoid that exhaustive search, right? And just beeline
straight to the answer. And Chapter 3 or any
class and algorithms like 122 or 220 do is entirely
about such insights. That's what an
algorithm's biases about. So the P versus NP question, essentially at an intuitive
level, ask the question, is find me needles harder than
distinguishing them from Hey, write the distinguishing Airbnb like the proof checker and
the definition of NP.-e

en-ECS 220 1c_4.2-1 graph coloring.txt

So we've talked about this
class, NP informally. I promise that later we
would formally define it. But I'd rather first go through
some examples of problems and NDP, I think it's good to build
some intuition for what a formal definition is trying to capture before you actually
get to the formal definition. So let's start with this
problem of graph coloring. So let's think about this situation. Most conference talks are bored. They're born. So if you
find two interesting ones, it's better for you if they aren't
scheduled at the same time. So we have some constraints here. Each attendee states which talks they want to see. We're
going to try to schedule them. And there are k time slots. And the question is,
can we assign talks to time slots so that everyone can
see all the talks they want. So we can formalize
this using graphs, as with most problems, into the k coloring problem. And the k coloring problem is this. You're given a graph G equals V E, or the set V of nodes is the set of all the talks and the set of
edges capture the constraint. There's some person who wants
to see both of those talks. So an edge uv is any, if there's somebody somewhere out there who wants to see
both of the talks. So in other words, they should not
be scheduled at the same time. And the question is, can we color the nodes
in V with only K colors? K is a constant here. In other words, can we assign talks
to the K different time slots? So colors here or like timeslots, so that all neighboring
nodes have different colors. In other words, all talks are
scheduled at different times. This is called a proper
k coloring of G. Okay, so let's some examples. Here's a graph on the left, and it's three colorable, right? I've used three colors, blue, orange, and gray to colour at. And if you go through
each edge and check, you can see every single edge is connecting two nodes that
have different colors. On the right, There's another graph, and it's been colored
here with four colors, blue, orange, gray, and black. And it turns out the one on the
right is not three colorable. Why is that? It's worth
thinking. Pause for a second. So you can see that the middle
node is connected to every other. So whatever color you assign here, let's call it black. It's gotta be different than
every other color around here. Okay, So now you have this ring
of five nodes around the edge. How many colors does
it take to color that? Well, it's a cycle with an
odd number of nodes here. So to make the whole
thing three colorable, just the edge would have
to be two colorable because all those colors have
to be distinct from the metal. But you can't to color
it whatever you color, say the very first ones
that you color it, gray. That means the one clockwise, it's gotta be the opposite color, blue if you had only two. And the one next to that is going
to be back to the first gray. The one next to that
has to be back to blue. And then the next one
would have to be gray, but that would conflict
with this one up here. So that's an argument that
if he had any odd cycle, you need at least three colors. So if you then connect
all them to a fourth one, you need at least four colors. So it's not three color. So this looks like just a fun little combinatorial
problem on graphs, but it actually has
many applications. This comes up a whole lot. So, for example, you might want
to assign different frequencies to close wireless devices
so that they don't talk over each of the colors
would be frequencies here. So I'm going to claim here that the k coloring problem
is contained in NP. So Posner and how to think
about that. Why is that true? Well, most problems that are in
NP are phrased in such a way that the statement of the
problem actually gives you the reason why it's an NP. So what makes a problem in NP? If it has a simple proof that can be checked with a
polynomial-time algorithm. So what's the simple proof
that a graph is k colorable? It's the k coloring, right? You just give a coloring of the nodes and then it is simple
to check by just looking at every edge and make sure every edge is connecting
two nodes are different. Okay? Now it turns out the problem
of two-coloring is NP. Why is that the pause for us? Well, what does a
two colorable graph? If you think about it, it's the
same thing as a bipartite graph. A bipartite graph is one whose
nodes can be divided into two subsets so that there's no edge between any two
nodes within the same set. All the edges are between the
nodes on either side, right? So telling whether a
graph is two colorable is the same thing as telling
whether it's bipartite. So how could you come up
with an algorithm for this? Well, you can just say once
I know the color of a node, I don't immediately, and
there's only one other color. I've got a color all its
neighbors the opposite color. And I've got a color all their
neighbors, the first color. And you can kind of
bounce through the graph, figuring out if there is a
two-coloring, how to assign it. And at some point you'll
either completely finish, you will color the entire
graph with only two colors, or you'll discover, oh, you, you want to assign
one color to another. That's already been assigned to the opposite color and you can't do it. So you get a contradiction.-e

en-ECS 220 1c_4.2-2 planar coloring.txt

So we talked about coloring
of general graphs. But remember that special type
of graphs, a planar graph. This is one where it's possible to draw the nodes and edges so
that no two edges cross. And one problem that was famously
open for a very long time, but result in the
seventies is whether every planar graph is 4 colorable. And you could think of this as the mathematical formalization
of the state that every map can have the territory's colored with one of only four colors so
that any bordering territory's have different Viewers like this for coloring of
the United States here. And it was also sort
of a famous proof in that it was one of the first ones to be resolved enlarge
part with computers. And so there was a bit controversial for a while whether the
proof should be accepted, but it is of course accepted that every planar graph
is for countable. So that means in particular, there's kind of a trivial
statement we can make here that there's a simple
algorithm for planar, for color and so on. Input a planar graph, Yes, if you want to know, is a colorable, you simply output, yes, they're all four colors. So it's not really an interesting question in
light of the four color there. But an interesting question
is planar 3 coloring. Given a planar graph, G is G three colorable. The examples I showed
earlier of graphs that are and are not three
colorable were both planar. So the answer can sometimes be S, can sometimes be no. So suppose you had an algorithm for three coloring that
works on any graph. Well, it works on any graph, so it works on every planar graph. So it can be used to solve the special case planar
3 coloring problem. So this leads us to say that planar three coloring is
reducible to three column. I'll use this mathematical notation here or use a less
than or equal sign. I want to emphasize
it's not that these are numbers and we're saying one number is less than or equal to another, is just a notation where if
you want to think of this being a quantitative measurement
at something like the quote, hardness of the problems. So when we say planar three coloring
is reducible to 3 coloring, we're saying that
planar three coloring is no harder than three coloring. But again, it's not that
there's a number out there called hardness and
we're comparing them. It's just a mathematical notation. Now, theoretical computer scientists
have a lot of different ways of formalizing exactly
what reductions me. And we're going to follow the
convention of the textbook and not get too technical
with the formalization. So I just want to point out, I once wrote a paper a
long time ago that had some definition of a particular
kind of reducibility. And it starts here and it
has an even ended here. It gets down to here. And by this point you finally
get to the definition. So this is some formal definition of reducibility and I'm only
putting it up here to warn you, okay, If you go out
there in the literature, there's a lot of very
technical definitions of exactly what reducible means. We're not going to worry about them. We're just going to use the
intuitive definition that If you had an algorithm
for three color, you could use it in a quote, easy way to solve planar 3 color. That's what we need. That's why we say that planar
three coloring is no order. But now it's worth asking, well, is planar three coloring? It's strictly easier. Like should this be a
strict less than sign? Is it the case that, for example, there could be a faster algorithm that assumes the graph is planar. So we're going to argue
now, but that's not true. So planar three coloring is
as hard as three colors. Or to put it another way we
just flip these two around. We're going to show that 3 coloring is reducible to planar 3 color. In other words, we're
going to show that if you had an algorithm for planar 3 color, you could call it and only just once essentially in order
to solve the 3 coloring problem. So here's how you do it. We're going to start with a graph. And it may not be planar. And we're going to convert
it to a planar graph so that the new planar graph can be three colored if and only
if the original graph. So what is it that makes
a graph non planar? It's that you try to draw
the edges and across the chip so we can replace
the sum graph right here. So picture this a, B, C, and D. There is a subgraph
of a larger graph and there's an edge
AAC, another edge BD. If we can replace these with the larger subgraph that
maintains the color ability. In other words, it's three colorable now that means it'll
be three colorable after. And if it's not three colorable now, looking not three colorable after, then, we'll get a planar
graph and we can just ask this algorithm for planar 3
color in, Hey, what do you think? Is this graph three colorable? It'll give us the answer
to the original graph. So you replace it with this thing. So you can kind of
visually inspect and see that there's no
edges crossing here. So if you replace to
these four nodes and these two edges with all
these nodes and edges, you've gotten rid of that,
cross it and you could do this iteratively to every edge
crossing in your graph. And now we want to argue that we've maintained the three
color ability of the graph. So let's imagine that
you had a and b. Are these two colors, and we'll just call
them orange and green. And we want to argue that no matter
how you color the rest of it, if you were able to color DNC
different before, you still can. So if we look at this graph, we can see that a and b
are different colors here. So the middle one, we have no choice. It's connected to both, so it's gotta be the third color,
we'll call it blue. And then we can kinda do this move for a scene
or whenever we notice a node is connected to two other nodes that are
both different colors. It has got to be the third quarter. So this one right here
has gotta be green. Now we have a choice here. This node here is connected to two. Great. So we could color blue
or we could color it aligns. So we're going to do bowl.
We're going to come back. See, let's suppose
the colored in blue. How would that force r-hat? Well enforced this to be orange. It will force this to be blue, but for this to be green. And again, you can trace through
and see each time you're coloring a node that's connected to other nodes that
are different colors. So you have no choice. This is forced to be orange. This here is forced to be orange. This is forced to be green, and it's connected
to orange and blue. This is forced to be blue, and this is forced to be black. As you can see, there's
a fourth color that we need because we have
all three colors here. And there's nothing we can do here. Okay, so maybe that
was the wrong choice. We shouldn't call it disability. Let's color it orange instead. Okay, that forces our
hand here, here, here, here, here, here, here, and here. And we see, okay, so we just made the wrong choice
to color this blue. So essentially we are forced
to color this orange. And so we can get these and
then look at what's happened. Whatever was the color of B, we've forced the color of B
prime to be the same, that, and whatever was the color of a, we force the color of a
prime to be the same thing. So if you have some coloring of the original graph,
that works, right? When you do this replacement,
you might think, well, you're now no longer forcing the same constraint in
the original graph. C would have been forced to
be a different color than a. But C and a are not
connected anymore. But C is connected to a prime. And a prime is forced by the design of this graph in the middle to be the
same color as that. So essentially we've drawn a new
subgraph and it has no crossings. But it forces these
kinds of corners of the subgraph to have the same
color as the opposite corner. And so it's sort of propagated
the constraint, the cross. So this shows that if a and
b are different colors, and let's just call
them orange and green. It forces the colors on the
opposite side of each of them in this little gadget here
to be the same color as the one opposite it. So now we can say, well, what if a and B were the same color? And you can do a similar argument, you can trace through and show if a and B are both, let's say green, the only way to color
the middle of this thing forces B prime and a prime
to both be green as well. So in other words, if this
original graph is 3 colorable, this one over here will be
as well, and vice versa.-e

en-ECS 220 1c_4.2-3 CNF-SAT.txt

Okay, so let's look at another
type of combinatorial problem. So this is motivated in the textbook by talking about a dinner party
and early fancy dinner party. Where the authors say, suppose I have a bottle
of an excellent Palomar. It's like a wine, a fresh quail with a bird and some delicious
rockfall, that's Achaeans. And you make the observation that, well the Palomar pairs
beautifully with the quail. So it would be crazy to serve the bird without the
why the poem are. So we can formalize
that as the constraint. If quail Then palmar another, if we have the quail than
we should have the Palmer. And remember that conditional
statement is equivalent to not quail or are. So we can write that as
not q or p. So however, we choose to put this meal together, we should obey this constraint. We say, well such a light one and
the Palomar would be overwhelmed by the rope for so I can't possibly serve it and the
rock forward together. So in addition to this
constraint, we want to say, and we should satisfy the constraint, not p or not. My friend likes both
quail and ROCC for her. So I would like to serve
at least one of them. So we want to say and q or r. And finally, I simply must have at least the hallmark or
the quail and p or q. So we call this a Boolean formula. And it takes three inputs that are Boolean variables
called P, Q, and R. And it's satisfied, meaning we can set its value to one by
setting P equals one, q equals one, and r equals 0. You can trace through
that and see that. Now supposedly came up
with a new constraint. And we say, well, my
cats very fond of quail. I serve it without some
rogue 4 to distracter, my guest will find is
portions stolen away. So that means we've added a new
constraint it and not q or r. And it turns out this new formula is unsatisfiable no matter how
you assign values to p, q, and r, all eight of them
make this thing equal to 0, so it cannot be satisfied. So this is an example
of what we call a conjunctive normal form
Boolean formula or a CNF. Cnf formula is a conjunction, meaning an end of
what we call clauses. And a clause is a big OR of
formulas we call literals. And a literal is just one of
the inputs or its negation. So R is a literal, NOT P is a literal, NOT Q as a literal. And then you, or several of them
together and you get a clause. And then you take several clauses
and you take the end of them. And that is a CNF formula. So the formula is
satisfiable if there's an assignment of zeros and
ones to the variables, that makes it true, right? I'm assuming here 0 is
false and one is true. So one of the things that
makes a CNF formula nice is that there's a nice sort
of way to think about how do you satisfy a CNF formula? Well, it's a big end of clauses. And to make an end true, every individual
input has to be true. So in other words, you have
to satisfy every clause. That's what makes a
CNF formula satisfied. So the decision problem
we call CNF SAT is, given a CNF formula, is unsatisfiable, is there a way
to satisfy all of the clauses? The textbook calls this simply sat, but I prefer to use SAT for general formula is that
don't have the CNF form. There is sometimes a use
and doing non CNF formula. So I'm going to call this CNF SAT. Now, this is contained in NP. Why? Really pause and think about it. Well, the witness in this case is the satisfying
assignment, right? The way that I can prove to you that this formula is satisfiable is I give you an assignment of zeros and ones that you can just
plug into the formula. And you can just iterate over
each clause and make sure that that assignment
satisfies those clauses.-e
