en-ECS 220 2a_4.2-1 3-Coloring reduces to CNF-SAT.txt

Now we saw that three
coloring is reducible to planar 3 color and meaning an
algorithm for planar 3 color in, even though it only
works on planar graphs, can be used after but a processing to determine the 3
coloring of any graph. And that's maybe not so surprising because they're both
questions about graphs. Digital transformation to turn a possibly non planar graph into a planer one
with the same answer. But what we're going to
show now is something a bit surprising that 3 coloring
is reducible to CNF SAT. Write a question about a totally
different type of object. So we're going to show how
if we had an algorithm that can determine whether an
arbitrary CNF formula is satisfiable or not. We could use that to
determine whether a given graph is 3 colorable or not. And the way we're going
to do it is by giving them an algorithm that
on input a graph g will output a CNF formula fee that is satisfiable if and only if the
input graph is 3 colorable. And so if we had an
algorithm that could determine satisfiability
of CNF formulas. Together with this
algorithm we're about to describe is called the reduction. We can use it to get the answer
about whether G is 3 colorable. And then we'd have an
algorithm for three color. So the key idea here is going
to be for each node in V, we're going to make
up three variables. You are UG and UB. And exactly one of them
will be set to true. So for example, coloring you
read will correspond to you. R is one and the other two are 0. Now we're going to have to enforce that by how we design the formula. So here's what we'll do
for each edge uv any. Now this is a good sanity check
when you're doing a reduction, make sure that your reduction
actually depends on the whole input. So in this case, what I've
said so far is we'll do this. And I didn't mention E at all. I just talked about the nodes. So make sure that somewhere in the reduction you actually use
the full structure of the graph. So here's where the structure
of the graph influences us. If we have an edge u, v, and e, We add clauses to capture the implication that if
you as a certain color, that implies v is
not that same color. So we have these three implications. View is red, it's not
the case that v is red. And if you as green, if not the case that v is gray. And similarly for blue, and remember that p implies q
is equivalent to not p or q. So we can replace these implications
with ors and look at that. They look like closets. So we have an end of
ores of literals. Now, if we stopped right
there, this wouldn't work. A formula that has nothing but clauses like this is easy to satisfy. You just make everything
falls, right? But we're not, we want to capture the fact that you need to
assign an actual coloring. And coloring corresponds to setting one of these to true and
the other two to false. So we're going to
also add clause like this for each node that
it's the case that you are, or UAG or UGA has gotta be set
to true at least one of them. So we're almost there. This ensures we can't just
make everything falls, but this allows us technically
to make something that's not a coloring because it allows us to make more than
one of these is true. So finally, we have to
add some constraints that no more than one of these three
variables can be set to true. And to do that, we can
just add these clauses. And if you go through
the logic of this, you see that they will
ensure that exactly one together with this
constraint over here, exactly one of each of these constraints is
going to be set to true.-e

en-ECS 220 2a_4.2-2 k-SAT for k=1,2,3.txt

So we've talked about CNF SAT. It has a special case called K sat, where k is a positive integer. And this is just a special case where each clause has exactly k literals. And so let's think about a few
special cases of the AS1 SAT. So I clam, one set
is NP. Why is that? Pause and figure that out. So once that just means it's
a conjunction of literals, ripe and a literal is a
variable or its negation. So if ever you get a variable and
its negation or to the literals, well, you can't
satisfy both of those. It would be unsatisfiable. But if, say, p weren't here and
you add q and r and not p. Well, if you only have a variable where
you only have its negation, that tells you what you ought to
set that variable to satisfy it. So it's very easy to just
determine if it's satisfied. Well, you just look, does it have
a variable and its negation? And if that's true, is not satisfied. All right, I'm going to claim that
2 SAT is also NP. Why is that? This is also worth thinking
about for a little bit. So pause. Okay, It's not quite as easy. So first let's observe that if
we have the formula a or B, that's equivalent to not a
implies B and not B implies a. That's actually looks like quite
a bit What's going on here? Well, just remember, an
implication is equivalent to the left side negated
or the right side. So not a implies b is just
equivalent to a or B, right? And notice that this formula, not a implies b is just the
contrapositive of this one, right? Not b implies a. So these two are actually
equivalent to each other. So taking an end doesn't
have any effect, but it's equivalent and they're
both equivalent to a or B. So here's what we're going to do. You want to know whether a
tooth to CNF formula Phi, such as this one over
here is satisfiable. You make a graph with one node
per possible literal, right? Pqr, and then their negations. And you draw an edge from
one node to another, corresponding to this up here, right? So each clause here is going
to contribute two edges. So this one, the first
edge it would contribute, would be you take the
negation of this, which is p. And that implies q. So there's a black arrow from p to q. And then going the
other way, You take the negation of the right one, NOT Q and draw an arrow to not P. So that's why we have
this other black arrow from NOT Q to not P. So you do
that with the other three clauses. You get six other edges
and it looks like this. So what are we gonna
do with this graph? So first observe this has
a satisfying assignment. If we set all of them to false, then this will be the
statement will be true. And something to notice
is that setting them to false corresponds to
this loop down here. Not p going to NADH
are going to not q. And if you follow these, you never visit backup here. So we're going to define
a contradictory loop. This graph G fee that
we derived from v to be a cycle containing both a
literal and its negation. In other words, at some point
you have the variable x. And then sometime later
this squiggly arrow represents that you've
maybe followed many edges. You can get to the negation of x, and then that's not quite
a contradiction yet, but from there you can get back to x. And if you look over here, you'll notice there's no
contradictory loop, right? Every cycle in here does not contain both a
variable and its negation. Now, if we were to add
an extra clause here, say and q or r, and it would add these
two green arrows that would introduce a
contradictory loop, right? So for one example, we
could see you could start at P and you could go to NOT Q. And then you could go to R, and then you could go back to P
and then to q and r and back to P. So you can have a cycle that
visits both Q and not Q. And the claim is going to be
that phi is satisfiable if and only if there are no
contradictory loops in g, right? And if you think about
what's going on here, what are these arrows saying? Well, this purple arrow
right here is saying, well, if P is Q, if P is
true, what do we know? Well, the purple arrow
says if P is true, then not q has to be true. In other words, q has to be false. And this black arrow right
here is saying, well, if not q is true, then not p has to be true. And that's not a contradiction yet. It might just mean q should be false. But then this is saying the blue
arrows I have not p is true, then not r has to be true. And then if that's true,
then q has to be true. If that's true, then
R has to be true. And if that's true, well
then p has to be true. But now we've said has to
be both true and false, which again, So a full proof
of that is in the textbook. We won't go through it,
but that's the idea. So this boils down to asking, are there any contradictory loops? And essentially that can be solved by just iterating over each variable and check whether it's possible to
reach from node x to node NOT x. And also is it possible
to reach from NOT x to x? And those are instances of the
graph reachability problem, which you can solve with a breadth-first search
or depth-first search, which can be done in
polynomial time and there's only a polynomial
number of variables. So graph reachability is NP. So that implies that
2 SAT is also in B. We can use a reachability
algorithm to solve 2-SAT. All right, the next integer
and interest is 3 SAT. So ones and twos that are both np. We're not going to argue
yet that 3 SAT is not NP. In fact, we don't know whether it is, but what we are going
to show is that despite there being more structured
than just CNF SAT, which allows very numbers
of literals in each clause. We're going to show
that this special case of CNF SAT called reset, is just as hard as CNF SAT. We're going to reduce
CNF SAT to 3 SAT. So how do we do that? Well, we're going to have
to write an algorithm that on input an
arbitrary CNF formula. Can convert any clause would say k elements into a number
of three clauses, meaning clauses with three girls. So let's start with the easy cases. You might have fewer than
three literals per clause. So suppose you have a clause x or y. What we can do is introduce a new variable that doesn't
already appear in our end, but let's call it z. And we'll replace the clause x
or y with these two clauses, x or y or z and x or y or Nazi. Now look at what this is doing. Whatever, suppose that the
input formula is satisfiable, then there's some way to
set x and y to satisfy. So if you just set them
to the same thing over here and just set z say to true, that would make this left clause be satisfied and also this right one, because x or y is satisfied, the fact that NOT z would
be false doesn't matter. And conversely, if this
is not satisfiable, so say if every assignment make some flaws like
say this one be false. What happens if this is false? Well, x and y both have to be false. So then look over here,
they're both false. So the only way that you
could possibly satisfy either clause would be to
satisfy the third letter O, but you can't satisfy both. They contradict each other. So we have one of these do clauses
are true, the other is false. So there would be no way to
satisfy this 3 CNF form. You can play a similar
trick with one clauses. If one of your clauses is simply x, you can now introduce two
new variables, Z1 and Z2. And now the four clauses you add iterate over every possible
value they can take. So if you just look at these, you'll see there's
no way to set z1 and z2 so that they are responsible for satisfying
all of these closets. At least like any
assignment to both of them, has to make both of these literals
false in one of these clauses, and then it's only x that's
leftover to satisfy it. So again, the truth of these
four clauses boils down to, does x satisfy this
original clause over it? So those are sort of the easy cases. Now, more difficult case
is if we have a clause with more than three variables flow. Again, this is easier by example, but it should be fairly obvious
how to generalize the example. Let's suppose we have a seven clause, a or B, or C, or D, or E, or F or G. So we're going to replace it
with these causes over here. We have a special start and end, the start one as the
first two, a and B. And then our first newly
introduced variable Z1, that's not in the original formula. And then the last one has
the last two, f and g. And this is only going to
apply it to clauses with four or more literals in them. So if you have more than
four now you're going to have some intermediate ones. And what do they look like? Well, each of them just has
one of the original variables, C and then D and then E. And then the newly introduced
variables sort of chained together. So whatever the last variable
was in the previous clause, its negation is the first one here. Then a new variable X2, and then its negation air, and so on and so forth. And so we won't go through
the case analysis. But you can do a similar
thing where you show if an assignment to a
through G satisfies this, then there's a way to set z1
through z4 to satisfy these. And conversely, if an assignment to a through G
does not satisfy these over here, then over on the right,
no matter how you set z one through z for this
is going to be false.-e

en-ECS 220 2a_4.2-3 Integer-Partitioning and Subset-Sum.txt

So let's think about this problem. Given a list of integers, this case 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, can we partition them into two
lists that have the same sum? So in this example you can, you can visualize it as putting balls on one
side of this or another. So you don't put the same color
on both sides and you can get 15 over here and 15 over here. And that corresponds to getting
a sum of 15 on each side. Now note that the total
sum has to be 30, right? Of each hat sums to 30
for each have some to 15, then the total has to be dirty. So this is a special case
of a more general problem, which is given a list of
integers and a target, some, it may not be half of
their total sum is just some other number
less than their total. Can we find a sublist
that sums to 90? So in this case we can five
plus six plus eight equals 19. So we formalize this as
two decision problems. One is called integer partitioning. We're given a list of positive
integers one through n k. We want to find a subset
a of the indices so that if you sum all the
integers in one subset, it equals the sum of all
those not in the subset. So subset sums that second
more generalized problem. For some reason this is always formalized as a set
rather than a list. A list can contain duplicates. A set cannot. So you're given that set of
integers and a target integer t. And the goal is to find a subset
of the integers that sums to t, where t may not be half of the total. Now I'm going to claim it's
obvious that integer partitioning is reducible to subset-sum,
right? Why is that? Well, as I said, integer partitioning is a
special case of subset sum, where you set the target to half of the total setup and you can easily figure out what the total silicons. So let's think about this from the perspective of what the
3 SAT problem was doing. The goal there was to figure out a satisfying assignment or
report that none exists. So each clause is a constraint. You want to find one assignment that satisfies all the constraints. And each constraint has
only three variables. There's just, you know, each
clause was pretty small, but there's many constraints. Whereas each of these
correspond to satisfying one single constraint that the
sum is what you want it to be. But that's some involves all
of the variables potentially. Okay, so before we talk about
how hard this problem is, let's see, is it easy? Let's explore some obvious kind of algorithmic attempt to solve it. So you might think at first that
a greedy algorithm would work. We could say, well, I want
to partition the numbers. I'll call it Xs here
into a left and a right, whose sums are equal. So we could start with
both lists empty. And we could try going through
the x's in sorted order and say, Okay, well, I've got some, some in the left half and
some some in the right f. If the sum in the
left half is smaller, well maybe the next
variable X should go there. Otherwise it goes into the right. But this doesn't work. For example, if you process
the list 45678 in order, it gives you left is 468
and right is 57, right? And that sums to 12, which
has not happened, 30. Okay, so what's the next tool in
our algorithmic tool, the egg? We could try dynamic programming and it actually turns out this works. And if you seen a bit ahead, you know this problem is NP-complete. So we'll talk about
how we get to have a polynomial time algorithm
for an NP-complete problem. After we explore how
this algorithm works. Okay, so we're going to define this predicate here that takes two
inputs are both integers. J is an index, so it's going to be one of the
subscripts on one of our numbers. And t is a target cell. And we're going to say f of
JT is true if we can balance a weight of T using only
weights X1 through Xn. Or in other words, if there
is a subset of the integers, of the, of the first j are
integers that sums to t, right? So this is like a
restricted version of the problem where you're only allowed to use the first
J integers in the list. And to solve subset sum, you want to calculate f of KT, where K is the final index. So let's think about how we would figure out the value of
the predicate recursively. Well, we can either use the number
x-j in the subset a or not. So we have this recursion. Maybe we don't bother to include XJ. And if it's possible to find
numbers from x one to x j minus 1, that sum to t, then
this would be true. F of j minus 1 t would be true. And therefore it would
also be possible to do that if we had XJ around, we just wouldn't
include it in the set. So in that case, f of
JT will also be true. But the other way for F OJT to be true is that we do
in fact include X. And so we also want to ask, okay, supposedly did include xj. What would the other numbers
that we include have to sum to? Well, Xj is responsible
for part of the sum. So t minus x j as the
rest of the cell. In other words, it's also possible
we could use the first j minus 1 integers to get to t minus x j
and then include XJ and get it. So that's our recursion. Now the base case is when j is 0. In other words, we're
asking what if we are not allowed to include any
of the numbers at all? Then when can we sum to t? Well, that's only true when t is 0, write the empty sum to 0. But any other target can't
be reached with no integers. So based on this base
case and this recursion, we can fill out a dynamic
programming table for all the values of t
and j that are relevant. So the first row is going
to be the base case. It's true for t equals 0
and false everywhere else. And then now we can trace through a couple examples of
using this recursion. So first of all, the whole left column
is going to be true. That corresponds to looking
at j minus one, right? So that will always be
true that we can simply include none of the integers
and get a sum of 0. But then sometimes we want
to include an x side. So in this case, if we include x1, which is equal to 2, right? We can work out from the, the j minus one case, in this case that J1 and
t equals two is true. And similarly we can fill
in the rest of the table. We're always going to have up arrows. And then the kind of slope of
these other arrows depends on the, the number x-j that
you're referring to. Okay, so there's a dynamic programming
algorithm. What's the running? Well, if w is the sum of all
the numbers and the whole list, then the running time is going
to be o w times k, right? We're iterating over. The biggest way to could possibly be, which would be the sum of
all the numbers, right? N, We're also iterating
over all k of the numbers, doing a constant time
operation for each one. Okay, so how fast is this as a
function of our input silence? All remember, the
size of an integer in binary is logarithmically smaller
than the integer itself, right? So this is polynomial in
the numbers themselves. If we gave our inputs and urinary, this would be a polynomial
time algorithm. But generally we don't, generally we're giving
an integers in binary. And so this is an
exponential time algorithm. If you write down the actual number
of bits that each x i needs, you're going to need
O of two to the b, if b is the number of beds and
then times the number of integers. So it is in fact an
exponential time algorithm. But if you want to solve this for
cases where maybe K is very big, but the individual
integers aren't very big. It would actually be inefficient. Algorithm is just exponential
in the number of bits you.-e

en-ECS 220 2a_4.2-4 Clique, Independent-Set, Vertex-Cover.txt

So let's move to another problem. And unlike the ones we've
talked about so far, this is one that's fundamentally
an optimization problem, although we're going to talk
about a decision version of it. So here's the cartoonish
setting from the textbook. I'm planning a cocktail party
from an academic acquaintances. However, there are a
number of rivalries among pairs of people who glare at each other and salt
each other's work and generally render the
conversation like tires. And I'd like to arrange
a gathering that is as large as possible,
the optimization part. But I want to make sure that I don't invite both members of
any of these pairs. So we can formalize that as
we often can with a graph, G equals V E, where the edges in E represents rivalries and the nodes
represent the people. So we define a subset
S of nodes to be independent if no two nodes
in S are adjacent, right? So if you have a set S and there was no edges between any
nodes, it's independent. And if the edges represent rivalries, that means everybody in
that set gets along. Alright, so these
would be a candidate set of people to invite to the party. But of course you want to find, you want to have the
largest party possible. So you would like to have the
largest independent set in G. So that's the optimization
problem that we want to study. Now, the way that we formalize
this as a decision problem, right? Rather than outputting
the independent set or the size of the independent set, we get a second input. And we say the input is a graph G and an integer K. It's a threshold. And the goal is to find an
independent set of size, at least K. Or put another way you want
to answer the question, is there an independent
set size at least k? So in this case, here's
an example graph and there is an independent
set for red nodes. You can verify there's no
edges between any of them. And if you stare at it a
little, little longer, you can see there's no way to add any new nodes to that while keeping it independent,
so it's maximal. It's also maximum mean, meaning there's no other set of
size five that's independent. So here's a very related
concept, a clique. All right, so a clique is a subset of nodes that are
all adjacent to each other. So in some sense, this
is a dual concept, independent set, independent set. You need no edges in a clique. You need every pair of
nodes that have edges. And the goal would be given
a graph to find a clique of size at least K to related
optimization problem. Now if you look at the exact
same graph we had above, that, the biggest
clique you can find, which is just size 2, doesn't seem to be all that related to the biggest independent
set you've been fine. But I'm going to claim these problems
are more or less equivalent. So pause right now and
think about why these are not merely reducible
to each other, but really easily reducible. They're practically the same problem. And the reason is that. You can take what's
called the dual graph. In other words, you keep the
exact same set of nodes, but you just flip the edges. In other words, remove all the edges in the
original graph and then add edges between every pair of
nodes that didn't have them. This one's a little harder
to visualize the edges. But if you think about what
happened in the original graph, since no pair of nodes
in the set had edges. And since we're flipping
all the edges now, every pair of nodes is going
to have edges down here. In other words, in
this graph up here, a set is independent if and only if it's a clique in this
dual graph down here. So that very easy
transformation allows you to, to sort of reduce one problem. That's why they're
practically the same problem. Now here's another concept from
graph theory, vertex cover. And we say a vertex cover
is a subset of nodes where all of the edges have at
least one endpoint in the subset. And the bigger you
make the vertex cover, the easier it is for me to
sort of cover all the edges. And so unlike clique
and independent set, where it gets harder to find one, the bigger you make the
threshold vertex cover is more like a minimization problem. The smaller you want
the vertex cover to be, the harder it might be to find. A trivial vertex cover
would just be every node. So it's not the same problem. And yeah, I'm going
to claim it's again, almost the same as independent set. So pause for a second and
think about why that is. So here's a vertex cover. And if you kinda look at this and
you look at the independent set, you can see that they're
complements of each other. Right? So let's think about, is that an accident? That, that the complement of this independent set ended
up being a vertex cover. Well, no, you're going to have that. It, S is independent if and only if its complement V minus
S is a vertex cover. The idea is, none of these nodes
have edges between them, right? None of them have edges between them. So every single edge in the graph
is either between two nodes, the art in this independent set, or if it touches one of
the nodes in the set, then the other node
is not in the set. So if you just take
the compliment, right, you know that every single
edge in the graph has gotta be incident on one of
these nodes here, right? Then no edge can be between two of the nodes that you left out
because it was independent. So again, by a very easy
transformation of an instance of independent set to an instance of vertex cover could solve one of
them if you could solve the other. Okay? And then this slide
is just summarizing that. So S is an independent set, is equivalent to V minus S
is a vertex cover, right? And then that's
equivalent to S. It is a clique and the so-called
compliment graph. So when you're looking
for a set of size k, all of these are solvable
in time O of n to the k, where n is the number of nodes. So you might think, well that
looks like polynomial and n to the k is polynomial, right? Well, n to a constant,
this polynomial, right? So n cubed as polynomial, n to the fourth is polynomial, but k here is the size of
the set we're looking for. And that might be as big as the
number of nodes in the graph. So in the worst case, this could be like time n to the n, That would be exponential. So it's polynomial if k
is indeed a constant, if all you care about is
finding cliques of size 3, those are also called triangles. Well, that's solvable in cubic time. But if you care about general, okay, well then it's
x, it's exponential. So here's some other variants of
this independent set problem. One is given a graph, we would like to find
an independent set of maximum size that's more or less the optimization version
of the problem, right? Another related problem,
which is a decision problem, is given a graph and
a threshold k, right? Instead of asking, does G have an independent set
of size at least K, we're asking, does its largest
independent set has size exactly k? So a question to ask is, is this problem in NP? It kinda looks like it is, right? Remember I warned you to look for decision problems where it looks like the solution is some object
you want to find, right? So this sounds like, oh, it's an NP and the proof would be the largest
independent set, right? You just verify that it has size k. Well, except how would you
know it's the largest, right? What if the answer is no? What if I ask the question, does G have an independent
set of size ten? Right? If I give you an independent
set of size nine, that doesn't prove that there's
no larger one of size 10. So this problem is not
obviously in Endgame.-e

en-ECS 220 2b_4.3-1 formal definition of NP and NP in EXP.txt

So now that we've seen many
examples of problems in NP, it's a good time to circle back and think about how
to formally define it with informally talked
about a problem is an NP. When there's proof, that's easy to verify whenever
there's a solution. So now let's formalize that. So ND is the class of problems. A number of problems here
means decision problems, which means languages are
subsets of their own star. So a problem is an NP. Whenever the following holds, that a string x is a yes instance
of a if and only if there is a W such that the pair X W is a yes instance of
a different language. We call a V the so-called
verification language. And what's AV? Well, hey, V is a decision
problem np regarding pairs XW, where we require that the length of w be bounded by a polynomial in x. So if a is a decision problem, right? And the, the above as the
textbooks, formalism, I liked it to be even slightly more formal with talking
about strings. Here. We say a is an entity
if and only if there is a decision problem AV
NP and a polynomial q. So that for all strings x, x is an a if and only if. The following holds. That there is a W of length
at most q of the length of x. So it could be longer than x, but at most polynomially long, such that the pair X
w is an AV, right? So if x is an a, there's a short proof
that's easy to verify, IE, the pairs and AV and Q
being short, or sorry, w being short means it's at
most q of the length of x. And conversely, if x is not an a, then there is no such WQ. No WWW give as a second input
would cause the algorithm, Brady to accept the terms. There's X is the instance
of the NP problem. W is the witness also known
as a proof or a certificate. And a B represents the decision problem that's
polynomial time solvable, the so-called verification
Brooklyn. Okay? So we define n to be the length of x. Well then n plus q of n is the
length of an instance for AV, because that's a pair x w. So that's a little bit longer
than n, but not too much. It's within a polynomial of n. So since Q is a polynomial, the running time of
the algorithm for AB, which is polynomial in n
plus q of n by definition. Well, that's also bounded
by a polynomial in n, Because n plus q of n is
bounded by a problem. Yeah. Okay, So with this formal
definition in mind, we're going to prove this
complexity class containment. Np is a subset of X. In other words, every problem in NP, though we think maybe not all
of them are contained in P. Well, they're all
decidable and in fact they're all decidable
in exponential time. So let's see why that is
for an input x of length n, the space of potential
witnesses is 0, 1 to the less than or
equal to q of n, right? So this is all the strings that
could possibly be witnesses. And that is about, and it's
theta of two to the queue event. So it's exponential
in N and no bigger. So for each problem a in NP, the following algorithm decides a, assuming that a has a verification
algorithm will call V sub a, That's about whose time is
bounded by a polynomial p. And this is just the algorithm that exhaustively searches
every possible witness. So an input x, you let
n be the length of x, and you iterate over every string
w of length at most q of n. And you simply run the
verification algorithm on x and w. And if that's true for any
of those, WE return true. If you get through the entire search without finding that
this ever returns true. And that's the part that
can take exponential time. You return false. So note that there's
going to be around two to the Q of n iterations
of this loop, right? And each iteration it's
going to take how long? Well, it's going to take p
of n plus the length of w, which is n plus q then which is
bounded by some other polynomial, some composition of p and q. So call that R of n. That's the polynomial
that bounds the, the, the running time of
each iteration of the loop. And that's done to, to
the queue of enzymes. So in other words, you
have total time is r times theta of two to the queue, then that's just two to the
something polynomial and n, which is exponential time. So we've shown a is an XP and it
was an arbitrary element of NP. So all event E is contained in X. Now, the conjecture is that you actually need in some
sense most of x to make this work. So imagine you wanted
to show that somehow. There's things in NP that
don't require that much time, maybe exponential, but
not huge exponentials. Well, the conjecture some
people believe is that no, you actually do need
exponential time. Or in other words, for some constant
alpha could be 0.1 point 0, 1 for some constant alpha. And t is not in time
of two to the Alpha. In other words, there's
some problem in NP. But the fastest
algorithm for it takes at least Time 2 to
the Alpha n or more. So that's unproven. In fact, showing that would be even stronger than showing
that P is not NP. This would be showing
that it not merely requires more than polynomial time, but in fact more than this
exponential amount of time. But as with most of the open questions and complexity
theory, we really don't know.-e

en-ECS 220 2b_4.3-2 NTIME(t(n)).txt

Okay, so we've defined NP and it's specific to
polynomial running times. We can generalize that a
bit to other running times. So just like we defined p and then time of T of n to get more fine grained about the
exact running time, n time of T of n. The
definition looks a lot like NP. So I will talk through the
whole thing except to note, this is basically the
definition of NP, except where we required
the verification problem AB to B and P. Now we're
requiring it to be in time t7. And whereas before we required
the length of w to be bounded by some polynomial of n. Now we're requiring it to be
bounded by O of T, right? So again, the witness
could be longer than x, but not so long that the running
time on these two inputs would exceed that of t. Okay, so with that in mind, we can
say np is just the union over all possible polynomials
of n time of that polynomial. Nx has a similar definition. It's n time of two to the
poly-A then, or in other words, the union overall c of n time
of two to the end, the sea. And that's contain an
even bigger class. We can call exp x, which is time
of two to the two to the poly-A. Then by a similar kind of exhaustive search argument
that there's only, quote, only exponentially
many witnesses year. So sorry, only doubly, exponentially many witnesses here. And therefore we need it most doubly exponential time to
search all of them. And more generally, n
time of T of n is always contained in deterministic
time of two to the o of t.-e

en-ECS 220 2b_4.3-3 problems not obviously in NP.txt

So I've mention that not every problem we care
about is contained in NP. So it's worth cautioning
to this moment that there's some problems that are
sort of not obviously in NP. Maybe some of them are, but they're not obviously in NP. So here's one, no Hamiltonian path. Given a graph, we want
to answer the question, Is it not Hamiltonian? So if there is a Hamiltonian bad, there's a short proof of
that and it's the path. But it's not obvious
how to give a short, easily verifiable proof that every path in a graph
is not Hamiltonian. It seems to require
checking all of them. And it's worth cautioning
that not every problem that quote
looks like it's in NP. Surely it, just because
it has the word exists or find or something
in the statement, doesn't mean it's an NP. So here's a good example. Diao Fan tiny equation. So this is the problem given a
multivariable polynomial equation. So for example, something like this. So x squared minus three, y to the fourth plus
two at z equals 0. You want to answer the question, does it have an integer solution? So that sounds kind of
like an NP problem. It seems, oh, the short proof, if the answer is yes, be
the integer solution. Except why should it be short? Right? Maybe those integers
could be huge as a function of the description length
in bits of the equation. And in fact, it turns out that this
problem is not even decidable. So it's not just that the bound
on the witnesses is bigger, there is no bound on the witnesses. They can get arbitrarily big. And the obvious exhaustive search algorithm that requires
in this case that you search all possible triples of
integers you could assign to XYZ, it might have to keep
searching integers forever. Integers can get arbitrarily big before it finds one and
maybe there is no solution. Here's another one we
talked about already. Given a graph G and an integer K, does GE's largest
independent set has size exactly k. If we ask at least k, Then that's just the
independent set problem. And you can prove it by just
giving an independent set of size k that proves that the largest one
is either that size or bigger. But if you want to know, is there an independent set
of size this and no bigger, it doesn't seem obvious
how to prove there's not a bigger independent
set up in somewhere. It's a similar idea when you're
asking about small things, would be given a Boolean
circuit C, You want to know, is there a smaller circuit that
computes the same function, right? It might seem that circuit that
smaller would be the proof, except how would you quickly verify that they actually do
compute the same function? You apparently have to iterate over every possible input and that
would take exponential time, Does not a polynomial
time verification. Here's another one. It is
actually contained in NP, but I'm just pointing
out is not obvious. And it's given a set of
linear inequalities, do they have an integer solution? So it looks kinda like
diaphragm tiny equation above. Except that first of all, you're asking about
inequalities and second of all, it's not an arbitrary
polynomial, it's linear. So you don't get to multiply
two integers by Egypt. So this one seems to suffer
from the same problem. If there's an answer, it's not obvious that the
integers would be bounded in any way by the number of equations you have and
the number of variables. But it turns out they are bounded by an exponential in that number. And so the numbers are at most exponential in the
number of variables and equations than their size in bits is logarithmically
smaller than that. So it's at most
polynomial in the number. In other words, there's a
polynomial link witness. Once you have one of those,
you can quickly check. I just plugged them
into the inequalities, make sure they satisfied.-e

en-ECS 220 2b_4.3-4 logical structure of NP and coNP.txt

Okay, So here's yet another slightly different
way to characterize NP. This is the class of
Boolean property is, that's the textbooks term. I would rather use
the word predicate, but it just means a value
that can be true or false. The class of properties of
the form a of x, right? So on input x a of x
is a Boolean value. It's equal to the following. The value of there exists a W of the appropriate size such
that Av of x w is true, where AAV is itself a
property or a predicate in P and W is polynomial in x. So in other words, if g is a graph, say than H of G is the property that g is Hamiltonian will then AHV, the verification property of GP is the polynomial time
decidable property that P is a Hamiltonian path in G. This is just a slightly
different rephrasing of stuff we've said already. But this definition shows the
asymmetry between yes and no. So remember De Morgan's law. So the negation of an existence
statement is for all statement. So for example, we have this. The graph G is not Hamiltonian
if and only if not H of G once. That's just the definition of age. And that's, let's just substitute
this equivalence with HB. That's true if it's not
the case that there exists a path P that makes HV of GP true. And then use De Morgan's law to
pass this not through the exists. So it's not that there exists a path if and only if for all paths P, it's not the case that
AHV, the GP evil. In other words, for all paths B, p is not a Hamiltonian path in G. So the very sort of
drawn out way to just express the intuition
behind De Morgan's law. So in other words, NP is
defined by exist statements. But the negation of an egg exist
statement is a for all statement. So it's not necessarily
an NP property. So we can talk about a complexity class capturing
for all statements. And that's called co-NP. That's the for all version of NP. So this is the class of problems
whose compliments or an NP. Now be very careful
here we're not saying co-NP is the complement of NP. Np is a class of decision problems. They're all decidable. They all have some polynomial-time
algorithm defining them. The complement is every
single other language including a bunch of
undecidable problems. So go and he's not the compliment of, AND you gotta go one further
down into the set hierarchy. It's the set of languages, each of which is itself
a set of strings. And those sets each have a
complement sac that is in NP. So another way of stating
it does these are the problems for which the no
instances have a short proof. So these are properties
of the form a of x equals for all w b of x, w of wounds, where b is a
polynomial time problem. So what I caution CA and D is
not the compliment of entity. Okay? So here's an observation. If P equals NP, then NB equals co-NP. Why? You should pause to think
about that for a sec. Right? And the answer is that, well, COPI is just p, right? If, if a decision problem is NP, then so is its compliment. You can just take a regular algorithm for it and swap the
yes and no answers. And now you have an algorithm
for the compliment. So P were equal to NP, then they'd both be equal
to copy, which would be go. So here's an interesting question. If n equals co-NP, does that mean P equals NP? So it turns out we don't know, it's possible that np and go and
D could actually be the same. And yet neither is equal to p. We think that's
probably not the case, but it is an interesting question. So some problems are not obviously
in either envy or co-NP. And one example is this problem. Given a graph is it's
an a and a threshold k is its largest independent
set of size exactly k, right? There's no obvious proof
when the answer is yes, and there's also no obvious
proof for the answer's no.-e

en-ECS 220 2b_4.3-5 nondeterministic computation.txt

So we'll talk about one final
alternative definition of NP. This definition was actually the first and the reason for the letter N in the name NP stands for
non-deterministic, right? It does not Stanford not, and B is not called,
not automobile time. It means nondeterministic
polynomial time. So here's how we formalize
it with our kind of semi-formal programming
language model. We imagine we have a new instruction
in our language that has an OR in it that represents one of two
different things we could do. So we might say go to
line three or line 9. Or we might say, we have a bit b, we want to assign it to be 0 or one. And the idea is, you don't know which one the
program's going to do. You could think of it like random. But I like the word
non-deterministic. Better just could do either one. You have no idea
which one it will do. So with an instruction like this, the program computation forms a tree configurations
instead of just a sequence. So you have your
initial configuration and you might have some deterministic instructions and there's just one next configuration, does one next configuration. But if you reach one, now the current instruction is one of these nondeterministic commands. Well then there's two
possible next configurations, and those form the two
subtrees of this tree. And then you get a
tree of computation. The leaves represent when you halt. And the leaves might
have different answers. Some might call with a no and
others might call with a yes. So the condition that we
say the machine or no, it has to just give
one answer, right? So we say that the machine accepts if at least one of these
branches as a yes, even if some others have a no, and it only rejects if every single branch
terminates with a number. So if the non-deterministic guesses are interpreted as
flipping random coins, then you can express
this with probability. You say the program
accepts if and only if the probability of
outputting yes is positive. In other words, there's at
least one leaf here with a yes. So NP can be defined as the class
of problems solvable in a sense, by a polynomial-time
non-deterministic. So polynomial time
here would mean that every single root to leaf
branch would have length, at most some polynomial of the length of the
input specified up here. Now with this one,
with this definition, That's a little more straightforward
to see that P is a subset of NP because p represents
deterministic computation. And the deterministic computation
is just a special type of tree where every single node except the one unique
leaf, has a single trial. So let's justify now that this is actually equivalent to
the other definition. So we have this
non-deterministic computation versus deterministic computation. You're provided with this witness. So here's the sort of
original definition of NP. We start. And let's just point out. We say x is an a if and only
if there exists a witness w, Not too long, such that the AV
verifier accepts the pair X W. So the sort of heart we have to show that this is equivalent
to the other definition. So the idea is that how can you represent this as a
non-deterministic computation? And the idea is we
can turn this sort of deterministic verification where
the witness kinda comes from nowhere into a non-deterministic
computation where the very first step of the
computation is guess the witness. So that would look like this. This would look like guessing
a two or a three bit witness. And then once you've
got that witness guest, now it's simply a
deterministic computation to run the verifier for a v. Now that you've got
both x and the witness. So in other words, like first guessing the witness and then checking it
is a special type of non-deterministic computation
where all the non-determinism is sort of frontloaded. That happens all at
once at the beginning. And then it's deterministic
from there on out. And it's not too hard to prove the other direction that if you have a arbitrary non-deterministic
computation where maybe these nodes and
repairing in the middle, you can turn that into a verifier. And essentially, the
witness in that case would represent the various bits that gets selected at
each of the nodes.-e

en-ECS 220 2b_5.1 NP-completeness and reductions.txt

Okay, So we've talked a
lot about the class NP, and now we're going to get to the main reason people
care about that class, which is this notion
of NP-completeness. So we say a problem is NP-hard if every problem a in NP is
reducible to that problem be. So we've talked about
particular instances of NP problems that are
reducible to each other. But this is saying a
much stronger thing that every single problem in NP is
reducible to this one problem. So in other words, it's at least
as hard as any problem in NP. Now technically this applies only to what are so-called
many one reductions. We've been a little loose with the concept of what
exactly is a reduction. So far I've just said, Oh, reduction is a way to use an
algorithm for one problem B, and then use it to
solve another problem. And we would want that if the
first algorithms polynomial time, the whole thing, it's
polynomial time. But many one reduction is a very
special type of reduction where the way you use the algorithm for B is you take your instance of a, you transform it into
an instance of B. You hand off that instance to an algorithm for B and
then whatever yes, no answer, it gives, you report the exact same answer. So it's like a tail call right
at the end of the reduction. So typically when we talk
about such reductions, we don't bother including
the part at the end where we call B because
it always looks the same. But the last step is always hand off the output to be and
report whatever it does. So the reduction itself is just the function that
does the composition. So it's a polynomial-time
computable function that takes as input a string, which is an instance of a, and, and outputs another string
which is an instance of B. For all x. That could be input x is an a
if and only if f of x is in B. So when we're talking about
reductions for NP completeness, this is always going to be the kind of reduction that we talked about. And we say that B is
NP complete if it's NP-Hard and also it's
contained in NP, you can have NP-Hard
problems that are not in NP and the halting problem is one, not even decidable, but it
turns out it's NP-Hard. But we're, in this chapter
are going to focus on only problems in NP. So the first theorem we'll discuss is something that's
actually not that obvious, but it's just that there
is an NP complete problem. So this is maybe not obvious. You know, we, we've shown how certain problems can
be reduced to others. But there's nothing that seems to
be intrinsic about the class NP that would somehow make you think every single problem and it is
reducible to one single problem. But it is, and in fact, it's, once we write it down and
then kind of seems obvious. So we're basically going to define a fairly artificial looking problem. It's not like a natural problem
would necessarily want to solve. And it's whole point is just to
be designed to be NP-Complete. So we call it Witness existence. And this is the problem given a
program P that takes two inputs. Called x and w. So this is going to be a verification
program like the kind of program that runs in polynomial time that lets you see that a
certain language is in NP. So we're given just that
program and then I'm writing the two inputs
it would take here. Those aren't both part of
the input to this problem. Does the program is and the first
input x and then a third input. And you can think of this
as like a time-bound. So the way I'm going to express it is it's an integer t in urinary. And I said most of
the time we want to do integers in binary
because it's more efficient. But here we want to use this to sort of clock how many steps we're
going to be willing to run p4. And so we want that to scale
linearly with the size of our input. And so if we write
down T 1s in a row, we're going to have a
one in the string for every time step we
allow Peter and Paul. So the question we're going to
ask about these three inputs, p, x, and t, is the following. Is there a w, a second input to
be whose length is at most t, such that P of x w outputs yes, in at most t steps. Or in other words, we're
basically asking if this thing is an NP verifier, and then x is an instance
of the NB language, and then T is an amount of
time we're willing to wait. We're just asking is there a witness that would cause the verifier to say yes
within this amount of time. So let's think for a second
and pause right here. What's the reduction from
Hamiltonian path to witness it? As we said, everything in NP reduces to this,
including this language. So let's think about that. So it would be more or less
the same for any NP problem. The on input graph
G, you want to know, is there a Hamiltonian path in G, the p and the x and the t would
give to witness existence. The p would be just to the
verifier for Hamiltonian path, it would be the same no
matter what the graph is. The x would be the graph as
the input to Hamiltonian path. And the integer t would be the
running time you would expect the verifier to take on that graph if you gave
it a Hamiltonian path. So it wouldn't be that long, they'd be close to linear, not much more than linear
time in the length of x. So it might be something
like length of x times a big constant or length of x
squared has to be on the safe side. Okay? And this is where thing and I
do y is t expressed in urinary. So think about this on your own. This is a very, this tends
to confuse students a lot. So we can talk about this
more when we discuss. But if you didn't
express teen urinary, if I had written down this problem, this would've been a legit problem to define if I said write
down T in binary, but then it turns out this
would not be NP-complete. This would actually be an n. Complete problem. So it is crucial that we
represented in urinary here. Okay, so here's the only reason that anybody cares about the class NP. And it's the following statement that if there is an
NP-complete problem in P, then in fact, every problem in NP is also in P. In other
words, P equals NP. So we don't actually think either
of these statements is true. The conjecture is
that there will fall. So the contrapositive statement, it's kinda more informative about what we think the
state of the world is. Which is that if P is not NP, which we think is probably true, no NP-complete problem is NP. In other words, showing
that our problem is NP complete amounts to show and
that is not contained in B. So we have the following
two scenarios. And these are the only
two possibilities. Either NP is different
from p and then all the NP complete problems are different from
all the P problems, or all three of them are equal. P is equal to np. And then by the technical definition, every problem in NP is NP-complete. So if we take P not equal to NP as a scientific hypothesis that we
don't know how to prove yet, but we have a lot of evidence for if a problem is
shown to be NP-complete, this is evidence that it
is intractable, right? Remember we said P may not
capture all the problems. That p may not be a
good representation of problems that are efficiently solvable because some of
them take time n to the 100. But we did argue that
if a problem is not NP, then it's most likely just not
efficiently solvable period. Okay? So we're going to have to think a lot about
these reductions here. Now remember, reductions
are transitive, right? So if a is reducible to B
and B is reducible to see, this implies that a
is reducible to see. So why is that? Well, a reduction
transforms an instance of a to b with the same answer, right? And the reduction from
B to C transforms a B instance to a Z instance
with the same answer. So you can simply compose them. Give the instance of a
to the first reduction, give the output of that
to the second reduction. And you've got hip hop, a polynomial time
reduction from a to C. So here's why that's important. If B is NP complete. In other words, all a in
NP are reducible to be. And if we can somehow show that
B is reducible to see this term, this will show that C
is NP-Complete as well, assuming that C is also contain B. So the picture looks
something like this. You have your NP-Complete problems, which are somehow the
hardest problems in NP. And you've gotta be that you
somehow know is NP-Complete. Suppose you have one
of these on hand. That means that everything
in NP is reducible to it. So suppose you can show
that B is reducible to see, we'll then by transitivity
through all of these, all of these problems must
be reducible to see as well. So if also you can show
that C is contained in NP, it's not up here somewhere. Then you've shown everything
in NP is reducible to see. So it is envy them. So
to show an ND problem, if you know it's an ERA, usually that part is easier. But to show that it's
also NP-Hard, right? Reduce some NP-complete
problem B to it. Do not go the other way. Do not reduce C to B. In other words, you're always
taking something you know, is NP-complete and you're reducing it to the unknown one you're trying
to prove, not the other way. It's very common to
switch those two around. So in other words, you show how
to transform an instance of a known hard problem into an
instance of the new problem. So the new problem is sort of
the output end of the reduction. Now, we're going to cover Sections 52 and 53 in the
textbook next in reverse order. 52 gives the first sort of
natural NP-complete problems. We gave an unnatural one
of the witness existence, but we're going to use that eventually to show that
these two natural problems, 3 SAT we talked about
already and a new one called circuit SAT
are also NP-complete. And then 53 will go
through a bunch of NP hardness reductions as well as general design
principles for them. And I find it easier to go
through Section five 31st. So to do that, we're first
going to have to assume that circuit SAT and 3-sat
are both NP-Complete. We're not going to prove it to. We go back to Section 52.-e

en-ECS 220 2c_5.3-1 NAE-SAT is NP-complete.txt

Okay, so now we're going to get
into some of the principles of designing these reductions
will do a lot of example. One important reminder from
the textbook to keep in mind the reductions responsibility
is to translate the question, not to answer it, right? We translate an instance of
one problem into another, but the reduction itself has no idea whether the answer to
either one of them is yes or no. And another got you to
keep in mind that when we want to show a
problem is NP complete. The new one we're,
we're trying to show, we're going to reduce an existing
NP-Complete problem to it, not the other way around. It's a common mistake. Okay, so let's define a new problem. Now we haven't talked about before
to variant of Satisfy Ability. We're given a three CNF formula fee. And in 3 SAT we want to know is there's some
assignment that satisfies it. Here we're asking a
different question. We want to know, is there
an assignment that makes every clause have two
unequal liberals? And we say that such
an assignment NA ie satisfies V. So what does that mean? Well, one way to satisfy a CNF formula clause is
to make every literal in it, but you also just have
to make at least one. All right, So some ways of satisfying
it would not NAEP satisfied, but not every NA ie, satisfying assignment is
a satisfying assignment because if you have
two unequal literals, well then there's a true
literal in nursing. So here's an example. If we set a equals 1, b is 0, C is one, D is 0. You can notice by
the colors here that every clause has got at least
a one and also at least a 0. So because they all
have at least a one, it's satisfied, but it's a stronger
constraint than to satisfy. Now, one of the things
that's nice about this problem is that unlike 3-sat, it treats true and
false symmetrically. All right? We just have to make
sure there's at least one of each in each clause. And this makes it useful for
other NP hardness reductions. The first thing we're gonna
do is show how this is related to 3 coloring. And in the 3 coloring problem, colors are symmetric, right? No one color is special. The way that a true value
is special in a clause that only a single true value
can make the clause true, whereas they all have to be
false to make the clause false. So that's what makes
this a little more adaptable to those other problems. But first, we have to
show that it's somehow related to normal satisfiability. So we want to show that this is NP. So we're going to show that any E3 SAT is reducible
to three, so hat. And therefore NA E3
SAT is NP-complete. So how can we do that? Well, we're given a
three CNF formula phi, which is an instance of an A3. So we want to output a formula
Phi prime an instance of 3 SAT, so that this is NA ie satisfiable if and only if Phi
prime is satisfied. So we'll do that by
replacing each clause in FY with these two clauses. If we have x or y or z. And again, these can
be literals and these could themselves be
negations, which means save. If x was the negation of an input, NOT x would just be the input. For instance. So we have to show that
fees and E satisfiable if and only if Phi prime is
just normally satisfiable. So in the forward direction, if feed has an assignment that makes this clause have at least one true
and at least one false literal. That's what it means to
be an a is satisfiable, then that will also be true
of not x or not y or not z, because you're just flip all of them. So you'll still have at least
one true and at least one false. Which means that this
thing will be true, right? That the conjunction of the two, so this is a satisfying assignment. Okay, so the slightly trickier
wanted to go the other way. So now we'll show that
if phi is satisfiable, then f0 is NA ie satisfiable. So observe that any
assignment that satisfies phi prime has to make
X or Y or Z true. Because an estimate,
both of these two. So that means at least one of x, y, and z is true. And it also has to
make not x or not y or not z true mean it has
to make at least one of X, Y, or Z falls, right? Which again, what does this mean? The two of these together
means that at least one of X, Y, or Z is true and at
least one is false. And therefore this clause in the original formula
is NA ie satisfied. So we've successfully reduced
and a 3 SAT to 3 SAT. But now it's time to check yourself. Is this what we're
supposed to do to show any 3 SAT is NP-complete. So think about that for a second. Now, I, I wanted to get a bit
of practice with reductions, but I also wanted to
get you thinking this is the wrong direction, right? This is not how we show that
any E3 SAT is NP-complete. If we already know that
3 SAT is NP-complete, we've gotta go the other way. Well, remember for this
whole section we're going to assume that 3 SAT is NP-complete. And in order to use that fact, we have to reduce it to a new problem to show the
new problem is NP complete. Okay, so how are we going to do that? Well, we're going to start
with a slightly easier to ask, which is to show that NAD for
SAT is NP complete, right? So this is a slight variant where you allow for literals per clause. And we're going to show
that 3 SAT reduces to that, and that's the right direction to go. We're assuming 3 SAT is NP-complete. And it's fairly clear
that NA for SAT is in NP. So if we can show that it's
that 3 SAT reduces to it, we will have shown any
for SAT is NP-complete. So this is a restatement of what a reduction like that
has to look like. We need that feed the input to 3. Sat is satisfiable if
and only if the output v prime of r reduction
is NA ie satisfied. Okay, so here's I will
do the replacement. If V has these clauses, we're going to take those
exact causes and then just add one more literal in each clause. That's why it becomes force ahead. And it's going to be
the exact same literal, just a brand new variable
S that we didn't. Okay? So how can we show this is true when we show each
direction separately. This is always how
you should do this. So in the forward direction
of Phi is satisfiable, then at least one literal
in each clause is true. And in that case, we can set S equal to false and keep the rest of the
assignment the same. And that will make sure that the prime has at least
one true literal, that it's x or y or z, and at least one false literal S. So now suppose conversely, we want to show the
reverse direction that V prime is NA ie satisfiable
by some assignment x. X represents an assignment
of truth values to these variables, including us. So first of all, we're going to claim that
the negation of any, any satisfying assignment is
also an E satisfy, Right? And think about that. If you
have at least one true and at least one false
literal in every clause, if you negate the entire assignment, it just swaps true and false around. So you maintain that
there's at least one true and at least one
false in every clause. So there's two possibilities. The satisfying assignment
x does NA ie satisfying assignment x for v prime and
either sets S to true or false. So suppose that sets us to true. Well that's going to be inconvenient. So we'd rather have us be false. But what we can do is negate
the entire assignment. And by this claim, well that's also an N, a
satisfying assignment. And now we get to assume S is false. And if S is false, and yet these all have at least one true and at
least one false literal. That means at least
one of X, i, y, i, or ZI in each clause
has gotta be true. So just restrict in that
assignment to the x, y's, and z's. It's a satisfying assignment for me.-e

en-ECS 220 2c_5.3-2 NAE-SAT reduces to 3-Coloring.txt

Okay, so we're going to go through some more
examples of reductions. And unlike the one we just did, which was between two problems, both involving boolean
formulas in general, the kinda more clever reductions or between two problems
of different types, like maybe one involves graphs
and the other involves formed. So we'll talk about abstractly right here about how to think
about doing these. And a typical reduction design will involve something
called gadgets. And these are substructures of the instance that the
reduction is constructed. And we'll get less abstract. I'll point out by example, what are the things they called
gadgets and the actual reductions. But There's two general
types, choice gadgets, and these give the freedom to choose particular parts of the NP witness. So in general, you're going to
have a reduction transforms an instance of one problem
into an instance of another. But it's generally the case that
as you look at the reduction, you could see how to
construct a witness for one problem out of a
witness for the other. And so the choice
gadgets are sort of how you get that transformation. And then the constraint
gadgets are there to impose constraints on the variables. To enforce that the
choices you're making up here are actually
legitimate that give you something correct for that particular problem
is it is quite abstract, but we'll get to concrete
examples in a bit. So first let's recall
the 3 coloring problem. But this is given a graph, an undirected graph G equals b, we want a three coloring
of the mean in a way to assign colors to nodes and v's that all nodes that are adjacent according
to e have different colors. Now we're going to show
three coloring is NP-hard. And by showing that any E3 SAT
is reducible to 3 coloring. And we already argued
three coloring is in NP. So this will show it's NP complete. Now, the colors are sort of symmetric here you can
just change the names of all the colors and it wouldn't
really affect whether it's a legitimate coloring
or you could permute them. So this is what makes NAD 3-sat useful because it treats
these two values, true and false symmetrically. Okay, So here's how we reduce an instance of any fees to
an instance of 3 coloring. So we have some Boolean formula. And imagine that it has
a clause that has x, y, and z appearing in it. So we're going to have
this choice gadget here corresponding to that clause. And the three colors
could be anything. But let's imagine that
we're going to interpret the color green to represent true and the color orange
to represent false. And then the third color will
just be neither. It'll be blue. So depending how these get colored in the final color and we're
going to interpret that as an assignment in the formula. So if you, so this is going to force because these two are
connected to each other, they have to be different. And because all of these
are connected up here, they all have to be different
than what this is, right? If this is blue,
these all have to be, one of the two halves is green
and the other is orange. Whichever one is green, will interpret that as the a site. So in this case, this would mean setting x to false and setting y to true
and setting z to true. And if you swap these around, this would be like setting x to
true and why to true and true. Okay? Now the constraint gadgets
or how we enforce that, the actual negations that appear in the various clauses somehow
constrain this things so that the only legitimate way to color this graph would look like an
NA ie satisfying assignment. So supposedly have a
clause x or y or z, right? So we know that we're going to
need some gadget here, right? And we don't know much about it yet. So let's just think through.
So we have to add something to this graph so that it's somehow
corresponds to this clause. So we can start with just
observing if this is x or y or z, like none of them are negated. While then maybe somehow the X, Y, and Z nodes up here ought
to be the things that are connected in here somehow, right? So this is me kinda walking through. How would I do a reduction? Well, maybe I'd start
with something like this and I wouldn't know
what should go here, but I know which node
should be connected. So the fact that X is
connected in here, and it's not the case that
this other node is connected. That's how the fact that
there's no negation on the X in this clause is showing up. Now this is always a sanity
check in your reduction. Make sure that somehow the specific structural constraints of the input, in this case it's the Boolean formula show up in the output, right? In other words, it
should be the case that if you changed the input formula, it would change which
graph you're getting here. So in other words, if we negated x, then there should be an
edge from NOT x down air and not an edge
from x down to here. So for example, if you had a
clause NOT x OR y OR NOT z, then this should be
how the connections. Okay, so here's how
we're gonna do it. Each of those gadgets is
just going to be a triangle. And this is going to be
enough to do the reduction. And we're going to have
essentially two nodes for each variable in
the whole formula. In this case there's three variables. And then we're going
to have three nodes in these constraint gadgets for each clause in the formula
connected in this way. So let's see how that
translates into. The formula is satisfiable if and only if the
graph is 3 colorable. So we know that up here, this is more or less the
only way to color the graph to color this thing some
color, we'll call it blue. And then to color these differently. So the only choice we have is
which one of these is going to be green and which one is going to be orange and same here and same here. But now we've further
constrain them down here. So suppose that we have
an assignment that NA ie satisfies the formula and that
assignment is 1, 1, 0, right? And you can check that
puts a 10 in this clause, and it also puts a
one on a 0 over here. So we're going to say, okay, that means that down here, the node corresponding
to that literal, we're going to want to color it the opposite of the
color up here, right? So in other words, if
green represents true, then we want to color
this variant of x green. And then the one anyons that it's connected to down here
should be orange. And similarly, because z
has been set to false, we look at wherever z is connected
and these gadgets down here, we set it to the opposite color. And then the third node here, we can just set to
the third color blue. So the idea is, in general, why did I pick x and z there? Well, notice that this
has at least one true, Let's say it's x and
at least one false, let's say at z and then
y, we're just ignore it. We just pick one true and one
false literal out of each clause. We set their colors down here to be the opposite of this
truth assignment up here, which makes them a legitimate
coloring because of this connection. And then we just set the third node representing the third
literal to be low. And then similarly over here, we identify at least one false. That's this x right here, it's false so we can set it to the opposite of false,
which is green. We identify at least one true. That can be why we set it to the opposite of the true
color, which is orange. And then the third one
we can set to blue. Okay? So suppose you instead. So that sort of shows
one direction that if the formulas and E satisfiable, then the graph is 3 colorable to how can we go the other direction? Well, now we'll show that if
the formula is not satisfiable, then there's no way
to color this graph. So again, we've
already argued this is more or less the only way
for the top part to look. Accept in each of these pairs, you're allowed to swap
where the two colors are. So now we're going to argue there's
no way to pick that swap ends. Air, you can legitimately
color it says suppose that, that no assignment
and E satisfies this. So you're forced to have
some clause with say, all true literals like 111
for XYZ will then, now, no matter what you do down here, each one of these is
connected to a green. And therefore there's no way to
put to color one of these great, but they're all
connected to each other. And you can't color just this
part with only orange and blue. This is no way to color the graph. So that shows both directions. Okay? So again, just a
reminder, reduction. Write the algorithm that
takes as input this formula down here and outputs this graph. It doesn't color the graph and
it doesn't satisfy the formula. It simply converts
formulas to graphs. Translating a question of satisfiability into
one of color ability. Now we then go and argue
about how we might satisfy or color in
one case or the other. But the algorithm itself is not
trying to solve that problem.-e

en-ECS 220 2c_5.3-3 3-Coloring reduces to Independent-Set.txt

So we'll do another
example of a reduction. Now this one is going to be
between two problems are the same type of object that
both questions about graphs, but they're much different
questions about graphs. 3 coloring is just asking, can you color a graph with three colors so that no two
adjacent nodes have the same one. An independent set is an
optimization problem, which phrased as a
decision problem says, given a graph and an integer K, can you find an independent set, meaning a set of nodes and no edges between any of them
of size at least k. So in this case, the choice gadgets that let
us translate the witness, the coloring from one
problem to the witness. The independent set and the other
are going to look like this. So we're going to have in, we're going to take a graph as input. We're going to produce
a graph as output. That graph we output
will be a collection of these gadgets connected in a way
I will see you on the next slide. But each of these collections
will be complete. So that will enforce that if any of the nodes
in the independent set, none of the other ones can be
because they're all connected. So if there are k complete subgraphs, any independent set with
k nodes must choose exactly one node per
complete subgraph. Because the only way to get
decay is to use all of them. So adjacent some graphs
are going to have different relative
nodes that have to be picked because we'll
hook them up like this. So the top one here is
connected to the top one there. I've drawn the edge, it's
kind of a dotted line, but it's just a regular edge, just like bees, It's just showing
it has a different purpose. Now the bottom one
connects to the bottom. So this would not be
an independent set. You would be forced to pick two different nodes in relative
positions in each of these. So the idea is going to be let, to let the relative
choice of the node within the complete subgraph be
a color of that subgraph. Now, the subgraphs we need are
just these triangles, right? So on input a graph, we want to know can it be
three colored? Here's one. We're going to output a graph that
has three times as many nodes. Because for each node
here we're going to have this triangle over here. And we're going to connect
the triangles in this way. The top of each will be
connected to the top of adjacent ones according
to the original edges. And we're going to
interpret how we assign an independent set or a
coloring in this way. So we have to show that by
doing this transformation, this graph is 3
colorable if and only if this has an independent
set of size k, where k is the number of nodes in the original graph or the
number of triangles over here. So if we colored this node blue, that would mean we
should pick this node to be in the independent set over here. If we colored these two nodes orange, we should pick these two nodes
to be in the independent set. And finally, these two are green than these two nodes should
be an independent set. And you can see that because
between pairs of adjacent clusters, it's always a different
relative position. The Gothic, this is indeed
an independent set. There are no edges between any
of these five black notes here. Conversely, if you have an independent set in
this graph of size k, where k is the number of clusters. The only way to do that. And you, since you can pick
at most one per cluster, is to pick exactly
one in each cluster. And they've gotta be in
different relative positions. So if you translate
backwards through this, you get a coloring of
the original graph.-e

en-ECS 220 2c_5.3-4 Tiling and Boolean circuits.txt

Okay, Now we're going to move
on to some reductions that show why I like this
textbook better than others. So it's very common for NP-completeness proofs
to involve these sort of classical combinatorial problems on graphs and formulas
are sets of integers. And those are great. But there's a lot of other places
where it shows up. And one model I like to
think about a lot because of my work and molecular
self-assembly is Thailand. So we're going to
abstract away a lot here, but we'll say that in this model, a tile is a so-called poly mono, meaning a connected
union of unit squares. So there's a single unit square, there's one on top of another. There's one next to each other. Here's four unit squares. Here's four in a
different arrangement. And the tiling problem
is given a set of tile shapes like maybe
these and a region R, So just some bigger union of
unit squares, the squares. The question is, can RB tiled, meaning covered exactly with non-overlapping and possibly
rotated copies of the tiles and t. So Here's an example. Suppose that our tile
shape is just this. We only have one in the set. But remember this can
be rotated as well. Can we cover this
three-by-three square rooted? So pause and think about
that for a second. So we can't, because as you can see, each time we put a tile down, we'll be covering two squares, but there's nine squares here. And we can only cover an even number
of squares with this one top. So this tile cannot be
used to tile this region. So how about this one? We again have a height to a
two by one rectangle here. And there is an even number of
points in this region, right? It's a, it's an eight
by eight square, had to location to remove, so they're 62 points. So can we cover this pause
and think about that one? So this is a little trickier. It turns out you can't,
and it's kind of a cool, clever argument to see
that you imagine sort of coloring each unit
square in the tile. And if you think about how are you
going to place tiles down here, it turns out the only
way you can do it is to force a checkerboard
pattern each time you put a tile down is going to put a blue square somewhere we react to put an orange
square next to it. Even if you're rotated. A little more complicated
than that, the argument, but you would have to do
a checkerboard pattern. And if you look, you can see
from the checkerboard, well, the original one that had
these two squares had an equal number of blue
and orange, two squares. But this one remove
two orange squares. So there's more blue
squares than orange. But each time you put a tile down, you're covering one
blue and one orange. So there's no way to cover all
of these exactly with this tile. That doesn't work either. Okay, back to the computational
complexity theory. This problem is contained in NP. Why is that? Well, the question is, can RB tiled? So the witness is going to
be a tiling, in other words, a description of where each tile should go and
how it should be rotated, right, which can be checked in polynomial time that they don't overlap and that they
cover all of our. Here's a related question
that kind of highlights the importance of how
we represent integers. How about if we're given
a set of tile shapes and then a region specified implicitly, we're going to assume
it's a rectangle. And rather than
listing every point in the rectangle the way we
would for a general region. Instead, we'll just give two
integers, the width and the height. And we ask, given these
integers x and y, can an x by y rectangle be
tiled with non-overlapping and rotated copies of tiles and
D. So this contained in NP. And that's worth thinking about. Okay, so there's one model tiling. Now here's one that's a little
more standard Boolean circuits, but we're going to relate
them with a reduction. So first I want to
introduce Boolean circuits. Now we've talked about
Boolean formulas. These are a slightly
different concept. So formally, a Boolean circuit is
a DAG, directed acyclic graph. The sources, meaning
nodes with no edges coming into them, are called inputs. The sinks, meaning that the nodes are no edges coming out of
them are called outputs. This has two inputs, one output, and every other node
is called the gate. And each of those gates is
labeled with AND OR or NOT. So to contrast with
a formula, circuit, gates are allowed to have
unbounded, unbounded fan out. So this OR gate has two
edges coming out at one, go into this gate,
one go into this one. But formula, if you think of a
formula as being a surrogate, it's the kind of circuit
where the gates all have fanout one or put another way, you cannot reuse subexpressions
in a formula without rewriting. Another way to think
of it as a circuit is a general directed acyclic graph. Whereas the formula is a tree where the leaves
are labeled by inputs. Alternately, you can say
a formula is a DAG where fan-out greater than one
is only allowed by inputs. So you can either think
of it like inputs can appear more than once
on multiple leaves, or you can consider now there's
just one input for each variable, but it can go to multiple
gates with fan out, but that's the last
time you allow fan out. Okay? And then a circuit is satisfiable. If there is an input
making its output true.-e
