en-ECS 220 3a_1-5.3 Circuit-SAT reduces to Tiling.txt

I don't know. We've talked about Boolean
circuits and Thailand's. And sorry, it's kinda like
formulas a little more general. And remember I said in this section, we're going to just assume
that the circuit SAT problem, which is stated right there, we're just going to assume
that it's NP-complete and use that to prove other
language also NP-Complete. So in particular, we're going
to show tiling is NP-complete. Now by showing that circuit
SAT is reducible to time. And in the reduction we're going to give them read on input a circuit C, we have to output a set of
tiles and a set of points, the region we want to tile with them. And the set of tiles is
always going to be the same. We're only going to use these two
tiles, the two-by-two square. And then this thing called a trauma, which is basically the square
with one corner cut out. But remember we have
all rotations of it. So what we want is to lay down some points in the region that
these are supposed to tile. So that trying to tile that
region with these tiles amounts to evaluating the
circuit C on a particular input. But there's going to be a
little bit a choice about the input that comes from the
choice of which tiles to put down. So we'll get to that in a sec. But to start, we'll define this
thing we call a wider region. So we're going to sort of connect up the various nodes of
the circuit with wires. And the wires are really going to be geometrical regions
in our full region. So this is a wire and
the idea is it can carry one of two values and that's
going to false or true. And that's going to correspond to there being two ways to
lay down this prominent. So as you can see,
there's no way to fit the two-by-two square in any of this. But you could put
the trauma know like this or you could flip it
around and put it like this. And these are going to respectively
correspond to true and false. Shows the wire kinda moving down to the right and
down a little faster. So it's like slope negative 2. There's other directions wires can go and there's actually eight
different directions they can go slope negative a
half or slope positive two. So in general, for all
the different ways that we can sort of point wires and you'll see them in later figure. You see that there's this middle
point of the wider region, the one that's not connected
to either corner here. And when you put the trauma know down in the direction you
imagine the wire Dine. If the, if most of the
traumatized behind that, that point, that
represents the value true. If most of it is ahead of that point, that represents the value false. Okay, so that's how we
build wires between nodes, but we have to start
with input nodes. So this region is going to
represent how we get inputs. So it'll be like a
square on top of a wire. And we're going to
interpret putting the two-by-two square in
there to be true. Why is that? Well, think about how to fill
in the rest of the region. There's only one way. And it's with the pattern of
trauma nose we call true. But you could put
instead of a square, you could put a trauma like this. And then the only way to fill
in the rest of the region. Oppositely oriented trauma nose
and that's the value false. And if you look, there's no other
way to fill this and there's three other rotations
this trauma can have, but they'd all leave something blank. And you couldn't Thailand. So these are the only two ways to actually fill in this whole thing. So that's how we specify input and
start sending it along a wire. But now we want to
perform logic on it. So we're going to show how
to do NOT gates AND gates. And that's enough to get
everything you can get OR gates by combining not an end. So the NOT gate is simpler. We'll start with that. And this region looks
a lot like a wire. It's at this middle part here where it actually is big
enough first square. And this is going to do negation. So let's see why we just
do a case analysis. If the computation is kind of
coming in from the top left, then suppose it's true. Well, what could we do here? We could try to put the trauma know, but this rotation doesn't work, nor does this or this. And this one looks
like maybe it works. Oh, but there's there's no tile
that could actually fill this in. So in fact, the trauma does
not going to work there. The only way to fill it
ends with the square. And then note the constraint. This puts that to fill
in the rest of the wire, you have to use the
opposite orientation. And so you've negated
true and made it false. But now the other case
is what a false came in. Well, it would fill in like this. And then you can see the only
way to keep filling this end is to orient the trauma and
the true configured. Okay, so this can
swap false and true. That's a NOT gate. The end gate is a little
more interesting. But it works on similar principles. If you imagine the two
inputs coming in the top, we're going to enumerate
all pairs of inputs here. So if the first input is false
and the second input as false, again, we have a bit
of case analysis here. We could try putting the trauma know, but this doesn't work or this or
this or this for similar reasons, there's no way to continue
with only those two tiles, but we could put a square
and then fill in the rest. And it's false, which is what
we want for an AND gate. Now we can have false
and true in here. Hopefully it's obvious that
there's one way to fill this in. It's with this trauma now. And then that also is
the false configuration. If we switch around true and
false, this somewhat asymmetric. And yet you can see there's
one way to fill, doesn't? It also makes the
false configuration. But now, if they're both true, they're going to fill in like this. And this. The only way to
continue is to fill in the rest of the wire with
the true configuration. So this is actually
the truth table event. It's true if and only if
both inputs are true. So now we can just
wire them together by placing the inputs
somewhere in the plane. So we can say put a here and B here, and the region is described
just by what I'm showing here. Alright, so this is
the region, right? So this describes if you add
this input to the reduction, you would give this region as
output along with those two tiles. So now let's just see how
to translate witnesses. So suppose that a equals true and b equals false satisfies this
formula, which I think it does. Then that means you
should choose to put a square there and a trauma 0 there. And then the rest of the thing
fills and you gotta NOT gate here. And you notice there's another
gadget I didn't quite describe, but there's a way to kind
of turn of wire so it goes in a different direction
and it really get into the details but works to yet
another AND gate here and here. And, and NOT gate here
and here and an AND gate here and you get this. So how so that's an example. But in general, if there's
an input to satisfy this, then you can choose the right
tiles here to tile this n. And conversely, the only way
to tile this is by choosing inputs that make this the true configuration on the
output wire here. So if this can be tiled, this circuit can be satisfied. Now notice one thing we left out. We did the circuit to be planar. There's no crossings
in the wire here. And if there were, well, it's not really
clear what we do. So this only works if the circuit can be drawn without
any wires crossing. And in general, not every
circuit is like there. There are graphs that
are not planar and they correspond to circuits
that are not planar. So the way to handle this is if you do have a
crossing in your circuit, you can replace it with
a bigger sub-circuit. And you can check that if you want
X and Y to be swapped around, you can replace that with
the subcircuit where you do XORs three times like this. And that will in fact, by businesses, one of those clever little
ways that you can use to swap two variables in a programming language without using an intermediate
temporary variable, you just do an XOR three
times and it swaps them. So this would work except we
didn't describe how to do XOR. So one way is you could
try to come up with a way to describe an XOR
with tiles like this. But the psychiatry just be
done purely within circuits. So this is a homework problem. I sometimes assign. How can you implement
XOR using only AND, OR and NOT gates in a planar way.-e 

en-ECS 220 3a_2-5.3 Tromino Domino-Tiling.txt

So we've seen that
the trauma know are that the tiling problem
is NP-complete. We were allowed to use to trauma knows which is
the two-by-two square, sorry, two tiles which
it's a two-by-two square and then this other
then we call the trauma. One question is, what's the complexity of just
the traumatic version? So you're given a
region R and now you're not given a set of tiles
or just restricted. The only time you're
allowed is the trauma now, which can be rotated. And you want to know can RB tiled? And that question actually is just
as hard, so that's NP-complete. You can use similar tricks to before to show how to simulate Boolean
circuits with only does, but It's a lot more complicated. So I think the textbook
author interests more actually showed this
in a paper a long time. So even with just one tile, if it's a fairly small
tile but carefully chosen, this problem is equally hard. So is that true? So it's clearly the case that if your tile is just
the one-by-one square, any region can be tiled with that, that the definition
of a region is just, it's a bunch of those
Where's put together. So there is one tile that's
sort of intermediate in size between the trauma now
and the single square tile. And it's the domino, two squares
stacked on top of each other. So the domino tiling
problem is given a region R can be tiled with non-overlapping
copies of the domino. And you might think, well, okay, this one, there's actually some
choice about how to rotate it. So maybe this is NP-Complete as well, but it's not, it's contained in P. So pause for a minute and
think about why that is. So one way to see it is that we can reduce domino tile
into bipartite matching. So note what we're doing
with the reduction AIR. We're not showing a hardness result. We're not reducing some known
hard thing to domino Thailand. We're showing that you can
solve domino tile and by reducing it to something
known to be NP, which is bipartite matching. So it's not obvious that
bipartite matching is NP, but it is, That's the
kind of thing you do in an algorithms course. So how can we do that? How can we show that? So here's a region, and let's imagine labeling each of the points with
a letter like this. And the idea is if recall this little trick
that shows you can't do the, the checkerboard that's
missing two corners with a domino is because each time you
put one of these dominoes down, you can imagine that if the two squares in the domino
are colored differently, then the only way to tile a region is by making it have a
checkerboard pattern like this. So you're asking, okay, what would be the choices here? Well, the choice would be, there's some domino that's going to cover a. The choices is the other half
of that going to cover B, or is it going to cover eat, right? And similarly for all the others. So essentially what
you're asking is if you put this checkerboard
down the nose, have to be how it's
colored when you're done. You know that there's some choice
like the domino covering, hey, can either also cover B
or it could also cover E, but you don't know which one. So what you're looking for is
a perfect matching, right? So in particular, if,
for example, the, the tiles that you want
to choose look like this, that would correspond to
this perfect matching on that bipartite graph.-e 

en-ECS 220 3a_3-5.2 recall Witness-Existence.txt

Finally, we're going to actually roll up our sleeves and prove that a problem is NP complete without appealing to
circuit SAT or 3 SAT data. And so circuit SAT is going
to be our first quote, unquote natural NP-complete problem. And we are actually
going to appeal to an existing problem being NP-complete and as
witness existence, right? So we're going to show witness
existence is reducible to circuit SAT and recall
witness existence is this problem that's very artificial
looking and we only defined it just to prove that there is
a problem that is NP-complete, but it's going to be
useful in this reduction. So this is given as input a program P and an input x and
then a time-bound. And you want to give
the time-bound so that the input size scales
linearly with the time. And so we give the time
bounty in urinary. So if we want to ask about
Renee NP for t steps, we give T 1's in a row. And the question about this, remember this program is supposed
to be like a two input program, like an NB verifier. The question we're asking is, is there a w a second input
to give B in addition to x? And it's not too
long, it's at most t, such that P annex w outputs, yes, and at most t steps. But recall T is actually
playing double duty here. It's a bound on both the witness
length and on the running time, which when we employed as
they're both going to be some polynomial function
of the length of x. So in other words, to do this
reduction, what does that mean? It means we're going to show
how to transform our input, the Triple P x t into
a circuit C sub p x t. So the subscripts there are going to remind us that although the
circuit takes an input, p and x and t are all sort of
hard-coded into the circuit. Like if X were to change, the circuit would change. But you can think of the input the surrogate takes
as being something like w. So, so the second input to P is going to be like the
whole input to the circuit. So more formally, to show
that this reduction works, it's gotta be the case that P x t is a yes instance
of witness existence. In other words, there exists a W of length at most t. So
the px W outputs, yes. And at most t steps if and only
if this circuit is satisfiable. And more or less, the way it's gonna work is
that circuit is going to be satisfied by the w over a year. So intuitively this works because
circuits can do any computation. So nowadays to us that
sounds kinda like, of course circuits
can do computation. But the insight here is
that Boolean circuits and Turing machines look like they do different
kinds of computation. So to be able to relate them
in this way and to keep the time-bound and the size of
the circuit, how you want. We need to be a little bit careful.-e 

en-ECS 220 3a_4-5.2 string representation of Turing machine.txt

So I said that the textbook avoids being too formal about
what an algorithm is. It doesn't define it as
being a Turing machine. Always. And I do like that, except once in a while when
you want to do approve, it really does help to know exactly
how to model your materials. So we want to show that
Boolean circuits can simulate algorithms
that are NP verifier. And it's going to be really
convenient for this proof if we can say that algorithm is a
single tape Turing machine. So just to review what we mean
by a single tape Turing machine, it's, well, it's typically
defined as some big seven tuple, but the key part is this list of TRH. So here's a transition table same. For example, if the Turing machine is in state q and it's reading a 0, it should stay in state q, right? U1 and move right? So if you did that here, it would change the configuration of a Turing machine to be same state. But it wrote the one over where the 0 was and it move the
tape head to the right. And so if you keep executing, the configuration of
a Turing machine, changes, eventually reach
some final configuration. And depending on whether
it's in state QA or not, you accept or not. Okay, so the key aspect here is that we need to simulate what this
is doing with the circuit. So we need to come up
with a way to represent the entire configuration
of the terrain machine. Not only the bits
written on the tape, but also what state you're in. Where's the tape head? In the bits that are the natural kind of data that
a Boolean circuit processes. So you might say, well, a configuration of the
triple right state, head position and take content. And here they are. So
this is like the triple corresponding to state
q, tape position one. And this tape content, we just write all the
bits until a blank. And you could imagine while the
right part as a binary string, the two left art, but they have some natural
representation as a binary string, if you add at most 16 states, you could represent them
what 4-bit strings. Similarly, the space
usage of the term machine tells you how many bits you
need to represent position. But this is not a great way to
represent it for our purposes. So we could do this, but we're going to represent
in a way that makes it really easy for us to describe how
the circuit is going to work. So here's a more convenient
representation of the configuration. So just as before, we will have our state said is
just going to be represented by binary strings of length log
of the number of states. And then the tape alphabet
could be bigger than just this. But we're going to assume that
are tape alphabet is just 0, 1, an x and a blank. And any computation you want to do, you can do with a tape
alphabet like this. So, so it's going to
be a symbol in 0, 1, 2, the log of the number of
symbols in the tape alphabet. Now the tape head
position will not be represented by just a binary integer. Instead, we're going to
have a bunch of wires, one per tape cell. And that 0 is going to
be on most of them, but one is going to be
on the tape cell or on the new near the cell
where the tape head is. So in other words, we're going to represent a
configuration like this by a string where we write
down the state in binary. And then we write
down the elements of the tape alphabet in this
binary encodings of it. For symbols, we need two
bits for each of them. And then instead of
having a single weight at the position where we can look in the string to
see where's the tape head. We put a one near where
the tape head is. So at the, near the fourth one of these little strings
representing the tape cells. And we put zeros everywhere else. So it's a very sparse representation, will have zeros everywhere
except one position.-e 

en-ECS 220 3a_5-5.2 circuit to simulate Turing machine, Witness-Existence reduces to Circuit-SAT.txt

So with this alternate representation of the configuration
of a Turing machine, that's mostly what you
would expect except that the tape head is sort of
encoded in urinary area. You put a one where it is
and a 0 where it isn't. Now we want to describe at
a high level how to design a Boolean circuit that
will update this to be the next configuration
of the Turing machine. So first we'll just show
how the data is grouped. You have sort of one
subcircuit per tape cell, each one with some bits
to indicate what is the symbol written there and
is the tape that there or not. And you also want to feed the state, and you also want to feed the
adjacent information from the adjacent cells
into the subcircuit because you have to know is
the tape head next to me? If so, am I going to
have the tape at next? Should I pass the
tape had to someone. So we're sort of wired up like this. It's kind of confusing when
you look at it like this, but this shows it's just local. And finally, you want to give the state to all the
subcircuit so that they know what to do based on the
state and the input symbol there. And then it's going to do some processing we'll talk
about in a second and then pass that information out to the next sub-circuit and it's
going to update the state. So intuitively, what's
going on in here. But we're not going to write out
all the N and the NOT NOR gates, but you could write down
gates that would represents, that would do the
computation appropriately. And what would that
computation it have to be? Well, first you'd have to
check if the tape head here. If so, update the tape
contents and the state, right? And this is a Turing machine where
the tape head moves every time. So if it's here now it shouldn't be here next time you change to 0, be otherwise, what's going to happen
with a tape that is not here. So certainly whatever
where the tape contents before these black symbols,
they'll stay the same. Just copy them from the
input to the output. But we also need to
check the neighbors. Try to remember the neighbors
might have the tape it. So this subcircuit right
here might see, oh, there's a one and it's
going to move here next. So if so, set the tape up to one. So that gives you a way to update this row of bits to
represent the next configuration. So here the tape had
moved from where it was to the right and you change the symbol from whatever 000
represents to whatever 11 represents, and you updated the state as well. So this is a circuit that
on input a configuration, the Turing machine outputs the next configuration
of the train machine. So you can put many layers of this same circuit
together and it will sequentially process to give you a sequence of configurations
of the Turing machine. So let's now ask how
big is this circuit? So the subcircuit
for each cell within these little boxes has this
many inputs and outputs. It depends on the number
of states, the number it. Of tape symbols, but it's
a constant independent of the size of the input that the
Turing machine is processing. So you can compute
circuits like this with exponentially in m many gates. So about this many, you can
do a little better than that, but it's about this many so polynomial in the description
length of the Turing machine, which itself is constant with
respect to the input size. And to simulate a Turing machine running for t steps
and using space S, How large to the
surrogate have to be? Well, if it uses space S, We need enough of these to represent all the tape cells
that are ever be used. And we do one layer of this
per time step you run. And remember that if a Turing
machine runs for time t, It can't use more than t space. Because it can at
most movable, right? Once on every time step. So S is at most t. So t times s can just be
replaced with t squared. And this over here is a constant. So the circuit is o of t squared. Description length. Are these number of gates in the number of time-steps
we're going to run for. Okay, So here's how we put all that together to reduce witness
existence to circuit SAT. In other words, to transform
a NP verifier represented by a Turing machine into a circuit
that satisfiable if and only if the ND verifier can be made to say yes with
the proper witness. So the reduction is on input
Px T for witness existence, we output the circuit
C sub EXT of width t, approximately n depth d, that simulates P for t
steps using t tape cells, knowing that's enough cells, if we only run for t steps, maybe we don't even need that many, where there's a W to
make that circuit output one if and only if px W accepts. So it looks somewhat like this. There's the very first layer which says we start
in the start state. Let's say this is the
representation of it. And what's going on here? Well, p takes two inputs. So we imagine that
that's written down on the terrain machine
tape with X and Y, X and W right next to each other. So x is going to be hard coded. So whenever I write these bits here, these are not actually
inputs to the circuit. These are hard-coded
constants, right? And you can, you can either assume your Boolean circuit
model allows constants or there's a way to cook up constants if you have only AND, OR and NOT gates. So those go here. And along with all these other inputs that are hard-coded as shown, then the part that represents the witness is the actual
input to the circuit. So these are the input
nodes to the surrogate. And then we add some blanks to
make the total width equal to t. So imagine we start with the term she has x on its tape followed by W. And maybe there should
be a character between them to separate them, and then followed by blanks to make up the total space
wherever we're going to need. And now, if you put the
right bits for w here, that would make p except x and w, that will make this
circuit output true.-e 

en-ECS 220 3b_5.2-1 from circuits to formulas.txt

So we've shown circuit
SAT is NP-complete. And remember the other
problem that we lean not a lot because it's got a lot
more structure is 3 SAT. So we want to show that
it's NP-complete as well. And then we'll know all those
other problems where we reduce 3 SAT to them
are also NP-complete. So 3-sat like circuit, that is a question about circuits. It's just this very restricted
type of Boolean circuit. First of all, a formula. And more than that
it'll 3 CNF formula. So because three CNF formulas are much more special case
than general circuits, we've got a job to do here. We need to transform a circuit C into a 3 CNF formula fee so that c is satisfiable if and only
if Phi is satisfiable. So the obvious way
would be to transform C into an equivalent 3-CNF formula. In other words, one
that takes the same them bots and gives the same
output on each of those. But it's not obvious how There's a few problems in
attempting to do this. One is that if we do a natural conversion of
a circuit to a formula, it can have an exponential blowup. The formula can be much bigger. And it's not clear how
to make it any smaller. And we need this to be, to be a polynomial time reduction. We need the output to be bounded by a polynomial length
in the input length. And the second problem is that's just assuming we're
converting a circuit to an arbitrary Boolean formula. But even if you could do that, well, converting an arbitrary
Boolean formula to a CNF formula can itself
have an exponential blow up. So let's just see examples. These problems. So the
first problem is if you convert a circuit to a formula, you have exponential blow up. And why is that? Well, the unbound,
unbounded fan out that circuits allow means
you can have shared sub-circuits that don't take
up any extra space there, just extra output
wires in the circuit. But they can exponentially
amplify in a circuit. So imagine you have this
very, in a formula. So imagine you have
this circuit takes four inputs and it's doing
something not very interesting. It's just alternating and taking an end and then taking an
order and then taking an end. But it's kind of feeding every output from one layer as inputs
to the next layer. And that means essentially
you can compute the end of X1 and X2 and
then use it here and here. And then you use a here where
you can use the OR of that with this over here and you
can use it here and here. And so if you convert this
to an equivalent formula, you end up having to
make copies, right? So you want the end of X1 and X2 to go to this
yellow or right here. But you also want it to be an
input to this green or right here. So you need to have a second copy of the subformula in a formula because you're not allowed to
have fanout bigger than one. So you can see that the
number of leaves in this formula tree right here is exponential in the
depth of that serve it. Because you're copying the same
sum formula two to the d times. So just a straightforward conversion
isn't going to work, right? So now a caveat is
that the formula on the right may not be the
smallest equivalent formula. And maybe there's
some other way to get a formula that is
equivalent to the circuit. But the point is that we don't know the general conversion method from circuits to formulas that
preserves their size. All right, now the second
problem is suppose we could get a formula that is
equivalent to the circuit. That's the right size,
but it's not C and F. How do we convert general Boolean
formulas to CNF formulas? Well, even for this, it's not clear how to do it
without an exponential blowup. So here's a formula which is it looks kind of like it
might be C and have, it's not, it's actually DNF
disjunctive normal form, where it's a big or of many
subformulas that are themselves ends. So that's like the opposite of CNF. And the obvious way to write an equivalent CNF formula
would be like this. Alright, so this is saying we
want x1 and y1 to be true, or we want X2 and Y2 to be true, or we want X3 and Y3 to be true. So how could we express that in CNF? Well, essentially the shortest
way we know of to list every possible clause
of length m, like this. And that's two to
the m total clauses. So this is going to be an exponential blow up in the
size of the original forgot. So night, so that approach
is not going to work. We would run into trouble in
either of those conversions. So we're going to give up on
the obvious way of doing this. But remember, we don't
need something strong. We don't need to have
a 3 CNF formula. It's equivalent to the circuit. In other words, it
doesn't have to give the same output on every input. It doesn't even have to have
the same set of inputs. We just need that the
3 CNF formula phi is satisfiable if and
only if c is satisfiable, they don't have to be equivalent. They don't even have to have
the same number of inputs. So here's how we're going to do it. We're going to add new input
variables to the Formula, One for each gate output. So imagine that this is
your circuit over here. So it's got these inputs. This is just an example,
but imagine you have these inputs x one, x eight, and then you have this circuit
with lots of shared subformulas. I will fan out bigger than one. That's doing all this kind of stuff. So we're going to give a
name to each of those gates, w1 through wn in this example. And each of those gates
is going to correspond to a new additional input
to the formula, right? So our formula will
actually have 18 inputs. In this case, we haven't drawn the formula yet, we'll
do that in a second. So the next step is for each gate, what we're gonna do is
add for 3-CNF clauses. And their job is to assert this
gate is functioning properly. In other words, it is correctly transforming its inputs
into its output. And we can do this. Output, right, is one of
the variables, right? So you can think of the gate as having a variable associated to it, or you can think of a wire, but actually that the two
wires coming out of this one, we'll call them both W2, so that the output of a circuit or a gates in the
circuit is a variable. So for example, if you had an end, what does it mean to say that
end is functioning properly? Well, it means that if
the two inputs are X1, X2, the output is w1. If X1 and X2 are true, that implies the
output should be true. But in any other case, X1 is true, it's true is false, or they're both false. That implies that the
output, That's right. But these implications, remember
an implication statement is just the negation of the
hypothesis or the conclusion. And the hypothesis here is an N. So when you negate it, You De Morgan through, you get an or. And then the third OR is from the implication and
you get a cost, right? You get an OR of three literals. So this asserts that the two inputs and the output agree according to the function that the gate is trying to compute. And of course, there's nothing
special about end here. The truth table for n is apparent in the sense that
there's a not, not, not. And then the lack of a knot corresponding to the truth
table of n being 000 001. But you could put nots
in any order here. You could express XOR, you can express the or, or, just a negation formula. So you do this for every
single gate in the circuit. So here's just an example
showing the gate W6 prime, but it's a very sort
of irregular pattern. So this asserts that every gate
is being expressed properly, but we need one more
thing we want to, we want that this thing is satisfiable if and only
if the circuit is. So we're also simply going to assert that the circuit's output one. And we could do that with a clause that just redundantly says, well, the output W 10 should be true or it should be
true, or it should be true. I, it should be true. Okay? So if c is satisfiable by some
assignment to x one direct sake, then phi is satisfiable by assigning the same values to X1 through Xn, the variables and V. And assigning the values to w1 to wn correspond into what those gates would be outputting in the circuit. So conversely, how do
you make that work? You just observe that if you've
somehow made this formula true, well in particular
you've made W 10 true. So this is true up here. And you've assigned some values to all of these variables so that every one of these
clauses are satisfied. So in other words, the
only way to make fee true is assign values to each of these intermediates
so that each one is actually properly computing
the function it says, which corresponds to some
assignment down here that satisfying the circuit
in the first place, because w ten is one.-e 

en-ECS 220 3b_5.2-2 variants of Boolean satisfiability.txt

So we talk a lot about
Boolean satisfiability. And it's common to
hear people say, Oh, they Boolean satisfiability
is NP-complete. But what do we really mean? Like I said, I don't like
that the textbook calls the CNF satisfiability
formula just sad because, well, there's one particular
kind and satisfiability. So the convention
I've saved is to use SAT when you mean arbitrary
Boolean formulas, circuit SAT when you mean
arbitrary Boolean circuits, which are more general, 3-sat
to mean three CNF formulas. But there's other flavors
of boolean satisfiability. Or SAT is general Boolean formulas. And a E 3 SAT is one we've seen. This is the question. Is it possible to make an
arbitrary three CNF formula? Have every single clause
have two unequal literals. So true and false both
show up in every clause. 1 and 3 SAT is a sort
of related variant. So the goal of 1 and 3 SAT is to make exactly one literal
true in every clause. So it's even more restricted
than not all equal 3 SAT. And this one is very useful because
this one is still NP-complete, even when you don't have negations. So even when every literal
is just an input variable, the problem of making
exactly one of them true in every clause is NP-Complete. This makes us a particularly
useful one for reductions as well. Now I want to caution and not
everything that you might call Boolean satisfiability
is NP-complete. So 2-SAT we saw is contained in B. So and we saw the algorithm to do that by reduction
to graph reachability. Dnf SAT. So this is satisfiability with Disjunctive Normal formulas, MY name. Formulas that are a big OR of clauses where each clause
is an end of literals. Such as you might get out of a
sum of products construction. If you remember your
digital design course, it turns out that is actually NP. And I may assign a
homework problem on this. And some versions of boolean
satisfiability, they're hard, but they're not NP, complete their hard for
other complexity classes. So majority sat, ask the question, do at least half of all the
assignments satisfy the formula? Writes a SAT is the question, is the number of assignments
that satisfy at least one? Majority sat says within inputs is the number of assignments at
least two to the n minus one. Sharp SAT is the problem of counting the number of
satisfying assignments. So this is not a decision problem. This is a search problem if you
like to look at it that way. So this is the problem to output an integer that says how many
satisfying assignments are there? Now this is, these
are both complete for other complexity classes that we probably won't get to in this course. But you can think of
them as being like the versions of P or NP for the
kind of problem you're asking her. So Sharpie is like NP where instead of trying to
figure out is there a witness, you want to know how many
witnesses are there. That's a Sharpie problem. And so these are at least
as hard as NP problems. If you could count how many
satisfying assignments you can see is that it
is there at least one. But we think actually that
it's even harder to count the number than indicate, is the number bigger than 0 or not. And then PP is this
probabilistic class where you're essentially asking if I were to
assign an assignment at random, would it have probability at
least 1.5 of satisfying the form? So the kinds of problems or you ask, is there at least a
probability a half? Those are so-called PPE problem stands for probabilistic
polynomial-time. Another variant is unique SAT. You want to know, does
the formula I have exactly one satisfying assignment? So if it had two or more, you'd want to say no or at
0, you'd want to say now. And this is complete for a
complexity class called us. And then there's this related one, which is pretty close to unique SAT. It's called unambiguous sat. And this is the problem. You not give an arbitrary
Boolean formulas, you're promised it so that the
algorithm doesn't have to, is not required to do
anything special on formulas, unless the formula has exactly 0
or one satisfying assignments. So it's an easier task than
telling is a formula satisfiable? You're promised an advanced if it is, then in fact there's only
one satisfying assignment. So that might make
the problem easier. And we don't know if this is NP-Hard, but it is NP-Hard via a
randomized reduction. So in other words, if
unambiguous SAT is NP, then that would imply
that SAT is solvable by a randomized
polynomial-time algorithm. That's probably correct. And we think that's not true either. So that's pretty strong evidence that unambiguous SAT is
not contained in NP.-e 

en-ECS 220 3b_5.4-3 Max-Cut.txt

So now on the next section of the textbook called
completeness as a surprise, which indicates sometimes you gotta be careful thinking
about this stuff. We open the course talking
about the difference between Euclidean path and a Hamiltonian path and how they look like
almost the same problem. But one of them is NP-complete, the other one's solvable
in polynomial time. So we're going to see that this
pops up in different contexts. So remember that a cut of a graph is a partition of its state set into
two disjoint subsets, V1 and V2. Sometimes people talk about the edges between V1 and V2 be in the cut, and that's fine to do that, but you gotta be careful because not all subsets of
edges define a cut. So for example, if
we have this graph, we imagine that we
partition in this way. Intuitively the idea is
you like you draw a line that separates the one
side from the other. But you can draw lines
lots of different ways. So the key idea is that the edges that define
the cut, in this case, they're not every edge
of the line crosses, it's every edge that the line
crosses an odd number of times. So this edge is not
in the cup because it crosses at once and
then it crosses it again. Easier just to think about a cut
me in the subset of vertices. But of course we call it cut
because what we care about is cutting the edges
that go across, right? So the, the red highlighted edges
here are the ones in the cut. And sometimes we talk
about weighted graphs. And then the weight of a cut is the sum of the weights
of all the edges. Okay? So there's a problem
that's fairly common to, to study in an algorithms course. The min-cut problem is given a
weighted graph and a threshold pay, you want to know, is there a
cut of g of weight at most k? And this is typically one of the first things you would
study in an algorithms course. You'll learn about the
max-flow min-cut theorem. And you'd show that this is npq. So for example, the
Edmonds-Karp algorithm takes time polynomial
in the size of G. So max cut is almost
the same problem. But instead of asking about, do you have a cut,
a weight at most k, you ask about a kind
of wait, at least K. And it turns out this
is NP-Complete, right? So there's little change in the
direction of the comparison, makes the problem vastly harder. And this shows up in a
lot of other instances we talked about Euclidean bath
versus Hamiltonian path. Shortest path can be solved
by Dykstra's algorithm. But asking about the
longest simple path in a graph is NP-Complete. We saw 2-SAT is easier than 3 SAT. We saw by reduction to
graph reachability, we sought to coloring is
easier than three coloring and coloring is basically just
telling is the graph bipartite. So a greedy algorithm
that tries to color it will actually succeed in figuring
out whether it's so colorable. And remember tiling even
with only one tile, just a trauma, know that
you're allowed to rotate. That problem is NP-complete. Well, no matter what kind
of tile you are allowed, if you only have one tile. But you're not allowed to rotate it. It turns out you can
solve this problem in polynomial time and
sometimes I assign elbow. Okay, so back to Max-Cut. Me say this is NP-complete. So how can we prove it? What we're going to prove
that an even easier version of the Maxcut problem, which is unweighted max cut is NP-complete by reducing that
not all equal 3 SAT to it. So unweighted Max-Cut,
you can think of as just the weight of every edge is one. So you're just counting
what is the number of edges in the maximum cut? And you can, an easy way to
think about that problem. That'll make it a
little easier to think about is you're asking the question, can you color V with
two colors, right? So that represents the partition
on each side of the cut so that at least K edges have
endpoints of different colors. So let's think about it that way. We'll draw a graph here. And our reduction on input a 3 CNF formula is going to
output a graph like that. So if the 3 CNF formula where
this clause and this clause, we would make these gadgets
for the clauses and then we would make these
gadgets for each variable. And if we have n variables and m clauses than the
number of edges here, if you count through this is
going to be n plus 6 app. That's just what you get from
a construction like this, where you have edges between all
the variables appear between the claws nodes and also between each variable node and clause
node that have the same literal. So the k that we're going to set, the threshold for how
many edges should be in the cut is going to be almost that bank is going to be almost
every edge in the graph. It's only going to be n smaller
than the total number of edges. So to have a cut of this size, you need almost every
edge to be included. And we're going to set it up
so that essentially the only way to get a cut of
the size to include every single edge except one edge per clause gadget
inside of the clause gadget. So the idea is that you interpret assigning true and false to the variables as
coloring in this way. So for example, to
set a variable true, you make the left node blue, the right note orange,
and you swap them for making the variable false. And remember you want every edge to connect endpoints of different colors if it's going to be in the cut. So essentially because we're
only going to leave out one per clause node down air. We need to make sure
however we color this, every single edge is
connecting different colors. So the idea is that if x
is set to be true, right? So, so, so what do we mean by
this formula is satisfiable. That means there's at least one
of each value and its literal. So suppose that the two
values we're going to use, our x is one and z is 0. So great that, that works. There's a little set X, have its node here be colored the opposite
of its node up here. And we'll have z here because it
the opposite of its node up here. And then for the third one, we just arbitrarily pick
one of the two colors. But the notice that there's only
two colors we're using here. And this is connected
to this node down here. And Arabia, sorry, we
don't pick it arbitrarily. We said that the opposite of
whatever this is upheaval, right? So we want this node and this
node to be opposite colors. But then that forces this edge to
connect nodes of the same color, which means we should
leave it out of the cat. And then similarly, if
we say not x down here, it gives us our 0 value and y gives us our one
value in the clause. That means we'll take
the third one, the z. We'll set it the opposite of the
variable node it's connected to. So we set it to orange. Because we said it to orange. We can't include this edge in
the cut to this other orange. So this gives us a way to leave out exactly one edge per clause gadget, which gives us the
number of edges we need. And that just proves
one direction that if we can NAPE satisfy the formula, we can color the graph in this way, which gives us our cut
of the right size. And you have to show
the other direction. We won't talk about it here. But the key idea is
to prove that in any, that if there's a cut of size k, there's an NA assignment
to the formula. And it said, if a clause is
assigned to all zeros or all ones, and therefore it's
not an a assignment. Then at most four of
its six edges, right? So the three internal
and the three going out to the variables
can be at any caught. And therefore, you couldn't actually have a cut of size k and neck.-e 

en-ECS 220 3b_5.4-4 Max-2-SAT.txt

Okay, so let's look at another surprising
phenomenon that can happen, which is that a lot of these combinatorial questions you
ask for some perfect solution. So for example, in a CNF formula, you need to satisfy every
single clause in order to satisfy the entire formula. Well, we could relax that and say, Well now we just want to get as many clauses satisfied as possible. Maybe it's not necessary
to satisfy all of them, but they somehow represent
some constraints. Like remember our cnf example
was the, The Dinner Party. We have a bunch of constraints
we want to satisfy by choosing the right food and drink
and cheese and so forth. Maybe we, we satisfy ourselves
and not getting every constraint, but as many of them as possible. So this is an optimization problem. It's not a decision problem, although we can phrase it
like a decision problem. And the optimization problem
is given a K CNF formula, find the largest number of
clauses that can be satisfied. Okay, so trivially, the decision problem K SAT
is reducible to max case at because you can simply ask whether the largest number of
clauses that can be satisfied is m, where m is the number of clauses. So if you knew how to get the number, you'd know whether the number
is the maximum it could be. So you could solve
the decision problem. Can you satisfy all of them? So in particular, Max 3
SAT is NP-complete as, as max force at max five set. But remember that to SAT is NP. So if I'm given a two CNF formula, there's only two literals per clause. Many clauses as I want. I can actually figure
out by reduction to graph reachability whether it's
possible to satisfy them on. But sort of relax in
this asking, Well, can I suppose is not
satisfiable and I want to know what's the largest
number of them that can be satisfied even in a two CNF formula, that problem is NP-complete. So it's easy to tell if all
the clauses can be satisfied. But if they cannot, then it's hard
to find out exactly how many. Maxcut as we just saw is sort
of another example where the quest for the best solution is harder than the quest
for a perfect solution. Because if you ask whether the max cut in a graph
has all the edges, That's equivalent to asking
whether it's bipartite. And it's easy to tell if
a graph is bipartite. Okay, So to, to see that
Max 2 SAT is NP hard. We are going to reduce 3 SAT to it. So the idea is we're given some 3-CNF formula and we
have these clauses in it. And so for each clause, and again, x, y, and z here are literals. So one of them could be like the
negation of an input variable. But if I write a negation
of that negation, so we want to turn this 3 CNF formula into a
two CNF formula where it's hard to figure out how
many clauses going to be satisfied or the decision
version would be, you get an integer
threshold and you ask, can at least this many
clauses to be satisfied. So you replace this clause with
these six too literal clauses. Where on each, where these three iterate over
every pair of literals, and these three iterate over
every pair of negated literals. Okay? And the key idea, we're not going to
talk through it here, but it's, it's just a
straightforward case analysis. Is that any assignment that
satisfies exactly three or five, there's any assignment has to satisfy exactly three or five
of these clauses, depending on whether it NA ie
satisfies x or y or z, right? There's no way to satisfy
any number other than that, assuming that you have at least a one in this clause and also at least a 0
somewhere in this clause. And that's just a
straightforward case analysis on the six different
assignments to x, y, and z that can make this have
one true and one false literal.-e 

en-ECS 220 3c_5.4 Diophantine equations and computationally complex integrals.txt

So another completeness
as a surprise result. Remember I DO fan tiny equation is an equation where you asked
for an integer solution. And famously asking this for general multivariate
polynomials is undecidable. It was proven in the seventies, but we could restrict what
patent equations we ask about. So a linear diaphragm
time equation is just a linear equation
where you're given as input natural numbers a, b, and c. And you want to know, are there natural numbers x and
y that make this equation true? And it turns out this is NP. Pause and think about
that. Why is that true? Well, if you think about
the number theory of this, you would need that the
greatest common divisor of a and B should also divide c. And that's precisely what the so-called extended
Euclidean algorithm gives, gives you x and y, such that AX plus BY equals
their greatest common divisor. So we're not going to get
into the number theory that, but it is possible. I just want to point
out that it's possible. So now what have we get a
little bit more polynomial, but not general polynomials. So instead of x and y are
just these linear terms, what if we allow one
of them to be squared? So a quadratic dial phantom
equation, coefficients a, b, c. We want to know, can you find natural numbers to
make this quadratic equation true? Turns out this is NP-Complete. So we're not going to
prove this in class. I just wanted to throw
it out there again as an example where the
details sometimes really matter for exactly
how hard a problem they can make a huge difference. Okay, So we are going to focus
a little more on this one that takes us a little bit away from the discrete math that we're used to. But I kinda like it because of its connection to some
other areas of science. So here's a question about integrals
that we might want to answer. It's just call it cosine integration. So we have a special formula
that we want to integrate. And it's the product of the
cosines of a bunch of angles. And in fact, the angles are
all related by these integers. So your input is basically just the parameters which has these positive integers,
X1 through Xn. We want to ask, is this
integral positive or not? Okay, So this is something
you'd want to figure out. And our key tool for analyzing this will be
this sort of variant of Euler's famous formula that relates the trigonometric functions
to the exponential function. So cosine of tau is this
exponential function of tau involving imaginary numbers. Okay? So first of all, we get, let me just rewrite this above here
in a more compact form. So we'll just use a product symbol. So we're asking about this integral
and using this formula here, we can substitute in
the numerator up here, and then we just factor
the two denominator out and there's n of them
multiplied together. So we factor of one
over two to the n out and we get that this integral
is this thing, okay? Now, how do we reason about that? Well, it's the product of n terms, each of which is the
sum of these two. So in general, if you have a
product of some number of terms, each one of which is just
a sum of two numbers. In this case, if they're
say, three terms, but two things being
summed in each term, you get eight total terms. When you multiply it all
through one for each way to pick one number or the
other in the final term. So that means if we want to
multiply together these n terms, what we get is all 2 to the n different ways to pick either the un-negated or the
negated exponent, right? These are the same exact number
except for negative sign up here. So here they are out with
the negative terms in red. Okay? So now we can group them in each term by which ones have the negative exponent
and which ones don't. So we can say this is
simply the sum over all possible subsets a from one to n. And then the subset a represents
the positive exponents here. So we multiply together all
the e to the i x j theta terms and then multiply all the e
to the negative i XJ terms, but sort of color it a
little bit different there. Okay? But then here is where
it was useful to use Euler's formula because we're
multiplying together exponent's, I'm sorry, we're multiplying
together e raised to some power, some exponent, which amounts to
adding the exponents together. So we can turn each of these products into a
sum up in the exponent. So each term in here is just
e to the I theta and then the sum over all j and a of x
j minus the sum over all j, not an a of that XJ. Okay? So it's just a bunch of
algebraic manipulation so far, but the key idea was to use Euler's formula to turn
this product into a sum. So that's usually
what it's useful for. Okay, So now just to reminder, this integral up here
equals this thing. This is what we just derive it. We're almost there. The first
thing to notice is you can exchange sums and integrals
because an integral, integral is just kind of like a sum. And now that we have this integral, okay, now we're gonna do a
little bit of calculus here. So let's think about
what to do with this. Well, the key thing to
notice is that if I have the integral from negative pi to
pi of e to the I theta y. But what do we have here? These y's are integers, right? We're summing up integers here. So Y is going to be some integer. So if we're constrain
that y is an integer, then if it's 0, right? Then this integral is
just two pi, right? Because if y is 0, e to
the 0 is just 1 and we're integrating from negative pi to
pi of one, so that's just two pi. But if y is anything else, right? No matter what it is, why does, is why determines how rapid
this frequency changes. But if we're going from Pi, from negative pi to pi, and that's what each,
it's kinda small print, but each of these are going
from negative Pi to Pi. Since y is an integer
worth if it's cosine, we're starting at the top
and ending at the top. If it's sign, we're starting in
the middle and ending at all. And all why is telling us is how
many times do we go up and down. But when you integrate, you know, there's as much above the
x-axis as there is below. So all of these just integrate to 0. So we get this very sharp
distinction, and y is an integer, it at 0, you get two pi, otherwise you just get 0 at this. So in other words, this is
simply a counting problem. No, this, these, the sum of
these integrals. What is it? Well, it's just two pi times
this first term times z, where z is just the
number of subsets. That would make this y term
right here equal to 0, right? So the number of subsets of a from
one to n such that the sum of all the numbers indexed
by something and a equals the sum of all those
not indexed by something today. Which means what's happening. This integral right here
that we care about, is greater than 0 if and only if z, this number of subsets
here is greater than 0. But just saying the number of subsets is greater
than 0 is the same as saying there exists a
subset that makes it true. In other words, if there
exists a subset a, the integer of the possible
indices into these integers, that makes the sum of them inside the set equal to
the sum outside the set. But that is exactly the
integer partitioning problem. Okay, So in fact we didn't
do a reduction airway. It's kind of a two-way reduction. We just showed that the
answer to this question, precisely the same as the
answer to the question. Is it possible to split these
integers into two sets, each of which have the same sum. And we know that's NP complete. So, so this cosine
integration problem. Now why do I find this relevant? Well, it's very common, particularly in
engineering and physics, to assume that integrals for
sort of relatively simple F, These kinds of functions can be numerically estimated by
sampling f at many points. It's usually assume
when you can write down a formula that you
care about in this form, great, you've solved, you
completely understand your system. But the NP hardness
of cosine integration suggests that as long as P
is not NP, exponentially, many points need to be sampled to get an accurate approximation when
that f is this product of cosine, which is considered by most people
who work with these to be a fairly simple sort of
form of the function. So in other words, it
cannot be estimated accurately by these means in
any feasible amount of time, assuming that P is not NP.-e 

en-ECS 220 3c_5.5-1 cellular automata (CA).txt

The last potholes
study in this chapter, just to show that NP-completeness kinda shows up whether
you go looking for it or not is one of my favorite models of computation
called a cellular automata. So cellular automata as defined
by so-called transition rules. And the idea is that you, you have a bunch of adjacent cells and think of the
kind of like a Turing machine. But it's going to be a
slightly different model. And the ones we're looking at here, just two possible
states, white and black. And the transition rule tells you, if you're a cell like say this one, then based on your color and
the color of your neighbors, What's going to be your
color in the next time-step? So this is saying if you're a
white console or your neighbors, your white in the next time-step, this is Saint of your white and
your left neighbor is white, but you're right neighbor is black, then you become black
in the next time-step. And this one says, if you're black, both your neighbors or white, you stay black and so on. There's eight possibilities
for your neighborhood. And this tells you what to
do in each of those cases. So locally. So it's unlike a Turing
machine and that all of the cells are doing this sort of
computation at the same time. There's not like a tape
head somewhere there. They're all doing this update. So what happens is you start in some configuration and space is
kind of going left and right here. But I'm going to show the evolution of this thing by time going down. And the next time step, applying this rule to every
cell would result in this. And then applying it again and again and again gives you some
sequence of configurations. So formally, a cellular atomaton is just a function which tells you on input a 3-bit bit string consisting of your state
and that of your two neighbors. What state, where you go to next
here I've got caught them 01. And a configuration
is a longer string. If you have n cells, there's a string of length n. You write f of c for the
configuration you get by applying f to each cell
and see, all right, so if this is configuration c, This one is f of c, this is f of f of c. I didn't really say what to
do at the boundaries here. There's kind of a few
different ways you can handle at sometimes
what you do is you assume the left neighbor of this
cell is this one over here. That's a so-called periodic
boundary condition. Sometimes you could say
it shrinks over time. So you could say maybe there is no cell here in the next time-step. Maybe you could say it
grows over time and just everybody becomes 0
when they first appear. Sometimes even talk about
infinite configurations, but we want so standardizing
the order of the input state. Tuples, meaning like this order here, this is lexicographical
order for them means that f can be described by an eight-bit string of
just the outputs, right? So I didn't actually have to write
the top three here if you know, I'm going to give them in that order. I can specify by just saying, what are the eight bits to right ear at top for time
t plus one in order. And so the above is
the string 01111000, which is 30th, and the lexicographical order
of 0, 1 to the eighth. So this one actually has a
name, it's called rule third, it's the 30th site. Well, you can list, okay, you could consider 2D
cellular automata as well. And with the most local neighborhood you can get yourself and
your immediate neighbors. You could say, well, your neighbors
are your eight neighbors edu. And again, you have to describe
based on their colors, what color will you become Next. Now, this is not really feasible
to list all of them, right? Because there's nine
total states here, so we'd have 512 rules to list, but we can list the particular
ones I'm listing here succinctly. And it's called the
Game of Life, right? And the way the game
of life works is by this sort of abbreviated summary, which is, you say, black is alive and white is dead. So if I'm alive, in other words, if I'm a black cell, then if either two or three of
my neighbors are also alive, then I stay alive. But otherwise I die either of
loneliness because there's not enough neighbors or
overcrowding because there's two. Now the other cases I'm
dead, I'm a white cell. How do I become alive? Will live exactly three of
my neighbors are alive. I become a lot, right? So there's just enough of
them to bring me to live. Otherwise I stated. So that's the so-called Game of Life. And people get pretty obsessed
with this one because it's, it's kinda crazy what
these simple rules can do. So Here's a very simple thing. It's not very exciting. A block
queue examine the rule here. If you had these four black and
everybody around them white, this will just stay fixed to keep updating it, they just stay black. Here's another fixed point That's a little better called a
beehive for some reason. So you update does it doesn't change. More interesting is there
are some ones that chain, so you get three in a row and
everyone around them as white, don't change their orientation, but then they'll
immediately change back. Remember, it's like it's kind of
a symmetric rule geometrically. Here's another little more
interesting one called a pulsar. These change but they
kind of stay in place. This is something
called a glider because this one every four transitions and actually moves down into the left and just keeps
repeating like this. And then here is a little bit more complicated one
called a spaceship. And it just moves in step diagonally. It just moves in one direction. And they're symmetric
versions of all of these, because the rules here are
geometrically somewhat symmetric. Okay, So let's just see an example of a particular configuration
of this thing in action. So it's going to start
with a spaceship plot for this thing is doing.
That's what's going to happen. And now in this video, it's inverted. So now alive as white and black. So here is a particular
configuration of lunches spaceships. And remember they're all
going to move to the last. And then we're going to zoom
out and seasonal what's going? Okay, So what happened? Well, essentially this is
a video showing eyelid. The Game of Life is what we
call intrinsically universals, where there's not some work we're going to cover on the
homework or anything, but it has been a pretty
important concept. But one of my research papers
and the idea is that the Game of Life is able to simulate any
other cellular atomaton, any 2D cellular simulation. As you saw in the video, is that there's these very
large blocks of cells, each of which represents a single
cell and what you're simulating. And so the Game of Life can
simulate any 2D cellular automaton, including the game of life. And that's what's being shown here. But then you can simulate itself.-e 

en-ECS 220 3c_5.5-2 CA-Predecessor.txt

So here's a problem that sort of related to predicting something about the behavior of
the cellular atomaton. And the problem is given
a cellular automaton, which again is given
by a function mapping in its neighborhood
states to the next state. And here we're going to
relax the problem a bit. We're going to allow
the cellular atomaton to have more than two states. So Q is it states that it
could be bigger than two. And F is some function describing how to turn your
current set of neighboring states, including your own
into your new state. And you're given a configuration
C and you want to know, does C have a predecessor? In other words, is there
some other configuration P, such that if that wherever
the configuration, the next one would be the
configuration C, we're given as input. So if no predecessor P exists, then c is called a so-called
Garden of Eden configuration. So for example, in the Game of Life, this is a Garden of Eden
configuration, which is not obvious, but this was proven that there is no configuration that if you update at once would
turn into this one. So the 1D version of this problem is contained in P can be
solved as not obvious, there's an exponential number of potential configurations you
might think you have to check. But with some clever
dynamic programming, you don't have to check them all. And sometimes I assign
that as homework. But in 2D, this problem is NP-complete and that's
a whole show right now. And again, this is why I like having a big variety of problems
to choose from that are NP-complete is you
don't always have to reduce 3 SAT or NAT set something. Cas are very geometric
as our timing problems. And so the way the
textbook does this proof is by showing that
trauma know Thailand, which we said was NP-complete,
we didn't prove it. But the, the version
where you only get one tile and it's that
little L-shaped thing. This reduces in polynomial
time to see a predecessor. So what we're going to have
many states in the CA, but our configuration we give as
input will have only two of them, called R&B for region and background. And the idea is that in
the tiling problem work, this is going to correspond to
the region we want to tile. So the tiling problem we're given, we're not given tiles
because the trauma know tiling is just you're only
allowed this triangle. But we are given a region. So imagine the region we were given
look like what's in gray here. Then the CA configuration
of output will be this configuration that has this region set to a
special state here. And we're going to
have an additional CA, state for each Trump that indicates its orientation
and relative position. So for example, if a trauma
0 is oriented like this, then the middle one will
correspond to see a state a, the right will correspond
to see a state B, but then that same part of the trauma will be F when it's
oriented differently. So what the transition function that we designed for the CA is checking, is essentially consistency. So the idea is, how would we make this state? Well, we would make it
if we were able to tie all the region with rotated versions of this tile with these states
set properly, right? And that the whole point
of the transition function is that it's just
going to check, okay, given the orientation
that my state claims, the trauma nose and then again, it can look, right. Every state can see it's whole neighborhood
around it of radius one. So we can see all of them. You can see far enough to see the other two parts of the
trauma know so for instance, if I'm in state age, it means I know that
I'm part of a trauma. Know that I'm in the middle and there's a G above me and there's an eye to the right. So I should check is is if I'm age, is there actually a G above
me and an eye to the right? Similarly, if I'm a C, I should check is there and a above me and a B above and to the right. So you check for that
and you also check some other little local
consistency conditions. And if they're all
met, you say Great. All of us who are in trauma knows we're going to
immediately change to our and any of us who are not in trauma has an a or
b. We're just going to state B. And if anybody finds
an inconsistency, they won't change to our. So only if you can actually tile this region in this way with type tiles that are
properly oriented, where the transition function actually get you to
this configuration.-e 

