en-ECS 220 5a_6.4-1 oracles and relativized worlds.txt

So how are we going to
prove that P is not NP? Probably seen that we can give proofs that separate P from
Xp and np from NXP. So why not p from Np? Alright, Maybe we can
just take the techniques. How to do that? I mean, this diagonalization
technique is sorted chief among them, and push that to separate P from NP. So the next section
shows that a quote, simple simulation
argument like the one at the time hierarchy theorem
uses to show that P is not x. Provably cannot work. Okay? So I use the word provably
there to talk about proofs. So let's dig into a
little what I'm saying. So some mathematicians and many computational complexity
There's favorite as time is so-called
impossibility proofs, which within theoretical
computer science corresponds to proving that a certain type of algorithm cannot
compute something. But their second favorite
pastime that they have on is impossibility of
impossibility proofs, also known as barrier results. And this amounts to proving
that a certain type of technique cannot prove that a certain type of algorithm
cannot compute something. In other words, it's an
impossibility proof on finding proofs that would
get results like this. That's got errands and takes it one level further with
this job for years, people tried unsuccessfully to prove this sort of impossibility
result was impossible. Our result shows the
impossibility of their goal, not aware of any actual
result like that. Sort of a third order
impossibility result. But this second-order one, there are a few of
these and somehow it appears to be unique to
theoretical computer science is a nice blog entry here
talking about how other fields of math don't have the so-called barrier
results too much. I think some people in the
comments get involved to say, well now there's some of
this in math, but it's, it's fairly central to
theoretical computer science. So let's take a look at than the sort of most
straightforward barrier result, which has to do with a concept
called relative position. So let's imagine that your
programming language again, our formal model of computation
here is whatever it is, your favorite programming
language, right? So imagine that it has a
magical instruction that takes one step to execute and the
name of the instruction is set. And it takes as input a Boolean formula and it returns true if and
only if it's satisfied. So in other words, this
instruction magically solves the satisfiability
problem for you. Okay, so we call the language
Saturdays little bit different font. This is the command in your language. This is the language or
decision problem itself. We call that language and Oracle. For this programming language, different use of the
word language there. So we call this decision problem and Oracle for your model of computation. And we call the program that makes calls to this oracle
and Oracle program. Now, I want to emphasize this is
not the same thing as saying, well, suppose that Sackler np and
then studying normal program. So I said one step here. If I said O n cubed steps, everything we study would still hold. But it's not the same
thing as saying, well, suppose there's a
polynomial time algorithm for SAT and that we can call it. It kind of matters here
that we can imagine this thing existing even if
SAT is not engaged, right? You can imagine that's not NP, but still think about, well, what sorts of problems are
efficiently solvable by these SAP Oracle programs
that would sort of run faster than is provably
possible if it's sad, is not empty. And it's not a
contradiction because P is defined by normal
polynomial-time programs, not polynomial-time SAP, Oracle programs that have
this magical instruction. Now if this all seems kind of spooky, there's an alternative
way of thinking about it that might be
more straightforward. Where you just think
about normal programs. And is this just
implement sat, right? It is decidable. There's an
exponential time algorithm for SAT. Use the standard slow
brute force search and use that to implement it. And now you have a
regular programs that can call the subroutine you wrote. But then instead of studying
normal running time, just define the running time
relative to sound of any program, reasonably exclude time
spent in the subroutine. So in other words, if your program runs and it might take
exponential time, but if you subtract off all the time, it takes calling the subroutine and you end up with only a
polynomial number of steps. That would be a program that runs in polynomial
time relative dissect.-e 

en-ECS 220 5a_6.4-2 P^SAT and P^NP.txt

Okay, So with this definition
of relativize programs in mind, let's define a complexity
class based on its hot pizza, the SAT, this is the problems solvable in polynomial
time relative to set. Meaning the problems
you can solve with a polynomial-time program that can call a subroutine
that evaluate sat. And you can implement that
subroutine however you want, but the time spent in it is
not counted against you. It's only the extra time that
needs to be at most polynomial. So this is a so-called
relativize complexity class. One way to think about
this is this is p and a world in which some
website out there exist. It just answers that
question instantly. Okay, so what are some
problems in P to the set? Well, there's one obvious problem
that they know besides the ones in P sacked itself, right? Like obviously if you
have an oracle for SAP, you can use that to solve
the satisfiability program. How about complement of SAT? Think about that on your own. Why is that contain and
P2? If you can see that. Then clique and compliment of clique, these are Bolton p to the set. Pause and think about
why is that true? And we can talk about
it in discussion board. Not only those, but actually any problem in P to
the clique, right? We can make clique
the Oracle instead. And the claim is any problem you can solve with an oracle for clique, you could also solve
instead in polynomial time, you had an oracle for say. Okay, we can define another kind of relativize complexity class where instead of considering
just one Oracle, SAP, we consider, well
what if the oracles, you know, what do we have
more than just that Oracle? In fact, what have we
allow any NP Oracle? So we take, for every a, we will get p to the a and we
take the union over all a and b. So one of the decision
problems in NP is sad. So it's one of the terms
that makes up this union. So obviously p to the SAT is
a subset of P to the envy. What about the other
way? Is that true? Pause and think about that. Okay, So we can think about this P to the NP complexity class
and compare it to sigma p2, sorry, PyPy to Oersted and P2. So an exercise to do at home, which I think in the past
I've assigned as homework. But think about it for
a minute right now. Is to show that P to the NP, which is the same as P to this app, is contained in sigma p2 and
it's also contained in pi t2. So it's in their intersection. So that's not totally obvious, but it's not terribly hard to prove. It's like a homework exercise. So what about the other direction? Because the containment
go the other way. And of course I can't prove it can't, because all these things are being unequal sort of depends
on p not equal. But the right, if they're equal, the whole polynomial
hierarchy collapses. All these things are
equal to each other, but we can show that it's not obvious that the
containment could go the other way. So Let's define this variant with the satisfiability problem
called for all exists SAS. It's a Pi t two problem actually it's complete provide P2 and it's
given a Boolean formula phi, and we're going to kind of
cut the inputs in half. So the first half of the inputs, we'll call x on the x and the
second half we'll call Y1 to Y2. And the question we're
going to ask is, is it the case that for any
bits you can assign to the x's, there is a way to assignments to the wise that makes the
formula equal to one. Okay, So, so this is sort of
obviously a pi t2 problem. It's phrased as a for all
followed by an exists, followed by the circuit
value problem, which is NP. Okay, so we can try to solve this in polynomial time with a SAT Oracle. Because somewhere
SAT is in the middle of this and we can
imagine trying to do it. And if you look at just
this portion, right, exists Y1 two ions such
that this is true. If you sort of fix what the x's are, then this portion of the question is a sac question that we're asking. Once we fix these inputs and just consider them
constants, the X1 to Xn. We just want to know is
that formula satisfiable? There's some insight into the y's. But how would we go about solving the whole
problem with the SAT Oracle? Well, it seems we have to iterate
over all the possible x's. So we can iterate over every
assignment of X1 to Xn in 0, 1 to the end, there's
two to the N of those. And then we could say, well, take that circuit f0
hard-code these particular x's and this iteration
of the loop into it. So that now instead of two n inputs, you've hard-coded the first n, What's remains, or
the other n inputs, you have an n input circuit
you would call side. And then at that point you can
just ask, is that satisfied? Well, that's this
portion of the question. Right? And if not, you return false because you've found a setting that
makes this thing falls. There's, there's no y. But if not, you have to keep going because we have to
verify this for all x's. If you get through all of them, then the answers is yes. This still takes exponential time. Even with the sac Oracle, you still got to iterate over all the possible assignments to
the first half of the inputs. And our intuition is that
this can't be improved. That in fact, having two
quantifiers like this, an exists and for all and exists. It is in fact, more power than
having a single SAP Oracle.-e 

en-ECS 220 5a_6.4-3 relativizing proofs.txt

All right, so here we're
going to step away a bit from these relativize
complexity classes. There's a lot of interesting
facts about them, but the main reason we brought
him up is to highlight this first sort of barrier result involving a certain type of proof technique called
a relative Ising proof. So simulation arguments, meaning essentially the time that we use to prove all sorts of results so far, where one algorithm is
going to simulate another. They have a crucial property. They all work even
if all the programs involved in the argument
are Oracle program. As long as they all have access
to the same Oracle problem a. And this holds no
matter what the oracle, it could be undecidable in fact. So a proof like this, we say it relativize is, and every proof we've seen
so far has this property. So theorems relating
complexity classes using simulation arguments also show that all the relativize complexity classes obey the exact same relationship. So for example, for any Oracle a, this first statement that we showed. So this is not the time hierarchy that this is not a
strict subset here. This is just if you allow
a running time of g. And then if you allow a
bigger running time t, So g, g of n equals big O of T
of n. Well then you can at least do as many dead, right? So in other words, all
the problems solvable in time g are also solvable in time t, because t is at least as big. Well that holds even if
you're talking about problems solvable by a Oracle programs, right? Is just observing that the
amount of time needed, G is at most O T of
n. So, so that holds. We still have that p to the a
is a subset of NP to the a, which is a subset of X to the a. The time hierarchy there and
still holds in all its glory. He's like problems solvable in exponential time with
access to an a or a goal includes and problems not solvable in polynomial
time even with access to an a. If there's any problem complete for NP to the a that
is also e to the a, then in fact those two are
equal, that still holds. So now we're going to see a non magical justification for thinking about
these magical oracles. And it's this that no proof resolving the P versus NP
question Can relative eyes. So all of the proof techniques
that we used up here that just involved one program
simulating another. Those all relativize if the
simulating program needs to simulate an Oregon instruction
in the simulated program, but it has the same oracle itself. It can just use it. So something other than just simulation arguments have got to be used to
resolve this question.-e 

en-ECS 220 5a_6.4-4 an oracle making P=NP.txt

Okay, so here is the theorem that no proof resolving P
versus NP can relativize. And if that, whichever
way the answer goes, there's an oracle that
makes it go the other way. So there's an article a so that P and NP are equal in the
relativize world of Oracle a. There's another Oracle bead
so that they're unequal in the relativize world of Oracle be. So we're going to start with a. It's slightly easier one to do. So we're going to define that Oracle to be this
problem we call predict. And we saw a variant
of this earlier where predict had a certain time-bound
hard-coded and do it. This one similar except
the time bound is now part of the input to
the decision problem. So we're given a program
Q and an input x, we want to know what is Q on x gonna do within a certain amount of time. The time is given as the third input. And here, because of some
technicalities in the proof below, we're going to want the time
to be written in binary. And we want to know does QX
output yes, within T steps? Okay? So we're going to go by a
series of subset inclusions here. So the first thing
we're gonna do is show X is contained in P to the a. So let E be an arbitrary
element of XP, write some decision problem. Solvable in exponential time to, to the n, to the c
for some constant c. And let's call the
program solving it QB. Okay? So we can decide if x is, if a given input x is an E
with an N to the C time, a polynomial-time program
that queries this a Oracle. What in fact, we can just make one query and just report its answer. It's a so-called mini one reduction. What's the query? Pause
and think about them. All right, So essentially
we just want to ask, what does QE do on input x, right? When I'm going to run QV. If we did, it would take time
to to the end of the sea. That's no good. We need to
hold in end of the zeta, not two to the n to the c. So we're not going to run
Q0, we're just going to ask our Oracle a, what would q0 do on input x if
you ran it for this many steps, the number of steps it needs to haul. And because this number of steps is enough to allow QV
to actually finish, this is its running time. The answer here will be the same. The answer is running at completion, and that's
the answer we want. So in polynomial time with access to this oracle
a, we can solve it. And he was an arbitrary element of X. So X is contained in PDA. Okay? Now let's consider an arbitrary
element of NP to DA, right? Some, some other problem, l, It's an NVDA. What does that mean? Well, it's decidable by non-deterministic program
that runs in polynomial time, let's say n to the c Islam constancy. But it's an Oracle program and
has access to this oracle. A. Let's call it q. Okay, so the first
observation is that this, this program might make query. But we want to bound how
big the queries can get. In particular, how big can the, the third element yet? Well, it's polynomial time and
it runs in time n to the c. And in time n to the
c, you can only write down into the sea possible bets. So overwriting t and binary and we can only
write end of the seat bets. That means the value
of T is at most two to the n to the c. Bigger
values require more bits, so the value t can't get much
bigger than this exponential. So we're going to use
that to arguably can replace each of those queries with a deterministic subroutine that executes the program q on input
y for this many steps. Right? And just answers the question directly without
consulting the oracle. A. So this would make QL, the decider for L, into still a
non-deterministic program. And they wouldn't be polynomial time anymore because we've replaced the one step oracle queries with
this exponential time subroutine. Now the time will be
something like n to the c, the number of queries we might make times the time needed for each query, which is two to the end of the sea. But there's no oracle. And oh, it's a
non-deterministic program. This subroutine and the
one accounting for most of the time here is deterministic. So there's still only
a polynomial number of non-deterministic bits. So that's going to be crucial. We're not, we're running an exponential time
nondeterministic algorithm, but we're not choose a
non-deterministic bits on every step. It's a very small part
of that computation. So if we now want to
convert that into a deterministic program by
iterating over all the possible, I know just brute force searching all the possible values for
the non-deterministic bits. We can do that. We can iterate over, well, how many possible n to the c length bit strings are
there today into the sea. So that means now we
have these two loops, one of which iterates over all the non-deterministic bits in
this non-deterministic program. And then within each
of those were possibly making this many
calls to this oracle, which had been replaced by this other exponential
times everything but the whole time there is what
is going to be two to the n to the c times two to the end
of the c times n to the c, which is itself at most, say two to the n to the c. That's
O of 2 to the 3 end of the sea. Well that's still exponential
to bigger exponential, but it's still Quote,
merely exponential. So L is an XP, right? We got rid of the non-determinism
and we got rid of the Oracle. So at the cost of it takes longer, so NP to the a is contained in XP. Again. Then finally, the easy observation, p to the a is contained in
NP to DA no matter the work, right, by the same reasoning, you can solve a problem even if you need access to an
Oracle in polynomial time, well, you can verify it with access to the same or
in polynomial-time. So putting those
three facts together, we have xp is in NP to
the a, which is in P. But it was already then PDA, which is an NP to the
a, which is an exp. So in fact, all of these are equal.-e 

en-ECS 220 5a_6.4-5 an oracle making P≠NP.txt

Okay, so now we're going to show that there's an oracle that
makes p unequal to Anki. And there's a lot of
ways to prove this. My favorite actually involves something called
Kolmogorov complexity, but that's a little more involved
to first define all the concepts there are we're going to do here is kind of not the
most rigorous proof. We're going to use some probability, but we're going to a bit about it, but it is kind of slick. So this is more of an
intuitive proof sketch where we're going to play a
few tricks of probability. So we're actually going to
generate the probabilistically. So we're just going to pick B
at random and show that, that, that it's possible that some called the probabilistic method to show there exists a
b by showing there's a positive probability of picking
a B that makes P and NP unequal. So here's what we did.
For each possible string length n. We're going to pick a random
string w of that like. And the way we're going to define
B is any string of length, then that's not w, it's not in B. So B is going to be a
very sparse language. Most strings are not in it. And the string w might be even
that's going to be probabilistic. So we're going to flip another coin. And if it's heads will put
w and b otherwise we want. So B is very sparse. Some string length, it's got
no strings of that length. Others, it has one. But that one is just picked at random and all the others
of that light, they're not. So. Okay, so now we're going to define a problem called affinity Oracle. And this will be the probably show is contained in NP to
be that not in P2P. Although when I say, we'll show it is, well, I mean, probably
that's what's going to happen because we're
picking B at random. We could get very unlucky, like would be, could
be the empty set. And then we're not, this
isn't going to work, but, but probably, you know, with, with some probability
this is going to work. So here's the problem. Finicky Oracle to the b. We're given as input, essentially just a string length, so a urinary string 1 to the n. And the question is simply
this question about B. Is this one of those string
lengths where B has one string? So is there a w and b of length n, or is it one of those string
length that does remember about, we're going to expect about half of all the possible lengths to
have a string of that length, because we're flipping an
unbiased coin to determine whether W goes into b
for that length there. Okay, so the easy observation is finicky Oracle to the
b is an NP to the B. So an input one to the n, you just guess a w of the same length in linear time
and you just ask your Oracle, thank this query obey is w and b. And it's clear that if there
is a string of length n and b, then one of the guesses
will tell it to you, and that means the NP machine
will, will get it ready. Okay, So now all the hard
work is to show that this finicky Oracle to the B problem
is not contained. And Peter. So how do we show that? Well, we let Q be any
polynomial-time be Oracle program that could possibly decided to let Q be any Under the
Sea time, the overall program. And we're going to show probably
it doesn't solve finicky Oracle. So let's imagine what CUDA,
They don't know what it does. It's an arbitrary polynomial
time Oracle program. But on input one to the n, It's going to query some
list of strings in the, maybe the empty list, maybe it makes note where he's, maybe it does. It runs in polynomial time
now runs in time n to the c. So the key query
that many strings, there's at most n to the c strings. Queries asking are they a and B? Now, they may be of
different lengths. It's going to simplify
talking about it if we just assume they're
all the same length, It's just technical details
to handle different lengths. So for the sake of making this brief, let's assume that all the queries
are the same length string. Now suppose that on all of
the strings or queries, you get the answer
false for all of them. Well, in that case, it doesn't really much
matter what the oracle be. Other than that, as long as the Oracle B is false on all
the strings that get queried, then all the strings
that didn't get query, they can be in B or not in B. And q's output is going
to be exactly the same for all of them, right? Because the only information it gets about B is what it makes
through the queries. So now let's just examine this
probabilistically, right? We picked a string at random. So first of all, we picked
at random whether or not to even put in a
string of this length. But let's suppose we did
suppose that there is a string of length n here. Well, what's the probability that one query is on
the w, That's MBB. Well, there's two to the
n strings of length n. Only one of them's and b, we pick that one at random. So the probability that one query hits that one is one is almost one. That's one reason that the probability of one query
hits it is really small. It's 1 over 2 to the n, meaning the probability
that that query is on a different string
where the answer is false is really close to one. It's 1 minus 1 over 2 to the n. Now, you don't make just one query. You actually make several queries, but not that many, not all 2 to the n. Only a
polynomial number of queries can be. So. And we picked these all
uniformly at random up here. So the probability that all n
to the c queries return false. Just this probability times itself, n to the c times, right? And you might recognize this if this number in the denominator
and this number were equal, like if they were
both n, For example, as n goes to infinity, this will approach one over E. But in fact it's, it's not doing. The number in the denominator is way bigger than the number up here. So in other words, this is
getting much closer to one. And we're not multiplying it by itself enough times to bring it down. So in fact, this is going to go
to one as n goes to infinity. So that means that with probability almost a half cuz
output is wrong, right? So Q is just trying to figure out, is there a string of
this length or not, but whether it's
correct or not depends on whether we put a string of
that length in here or not. So if there is in fact a
string of that length, then Qt Q and output one. Otherwise it would
have to add up to 0. But whatever it outputs, It's not even depending on the query because it probably
didn't query string w. So it has probability pretty
close to a half to be wrong. And this is for one particular,
for one particular, and it's probably, it has a
1.5 chance of being wrong. But then there's another
end beyond that. There's n plus 1 and n
plus 2 and n plus three. So the probability that
for some men that gets it wrong is one, right. It's going to get the answer
wrong for one of these trends. So with probability 1, infinity Oracle to the
b is not in T to the B. So in fact a to D and N D
to the D are not equal.-e 

en-ECS 220 5b_6.6-1 Ladner's theorem, existence of NP-intermediate problems.txt

Now we've seen that a
whole lot of problems that are in NP that have
polynomial-time verifier is, are either in p, they have polynomial time algorithms, decide them, or their NP-complete. So a natural question is, are there any problems
that are neither? And this is so-called
gladness theorem, and it says yes, shows
the existence of so-called NP intermediate problems. So if P equals NP, well then every problem in P other than the empty set and Sigma
star would be NP complete. But so Lander's theorem is conditional on P not
equal to negative eight. And it says If they're not equal, then there is an
intermediate problem. There's a problem a in NP that is neither empty nor is it NP-complete. Now, as with the time
hierarchy theorem, a is not a natural problem we constructed artificially just
to show that there's theorem. So the only goals of the
proof are going to be to ensure one that a is
actually in NP, right? And it's easy to do this if
you don't care if it's an NP, like the halting problem is, is not in NP, so it can't be
either NP complete or NP. But the key is that we want to show there's something actually in
between NP-Complete and B. So the only thing we want
to show is it's an NP, but it's not contained in P, and neither is an NP-Complete. So if we draw the Venn diagram of P and P and the NP complete problems, we know that if any
problem in NP is not NP, then none of the
NP-Complete problems are. But that leaves open the
possibility that the union of NP-Complete and p could be NP. But this is showing now
there's something in between. Now it does seem likely
that some natural problems, For example, problems
related to factoring, could be NP intermediate as well. But we don't really have
evidence of that for factoring other then we don't know
how to show their entity. There is fairly strong evidence a factory and it's not NP-complete, but I think maybe less strong
evidence that is not NP. Okay, So this is a
fairly complex theorem. And including the fairly
complex proof of this theorem. So we're going to start by just
defining the problem and see as sort of a high level outline of how we define it so as
to get the property X2. So first we're going to talk about the satisfiability
problem in this kind of functional notation where
it's like a predicate. So sack of x is true if and only if x is a binary string that encodes
a satisfiable Boolean formula. So we're going to kind
of bounce between thinking of this as a
structured data like it's a, it's a Boolean formula
versus it's just a string. Now we're going to define a very slowly increasing function from natural numbers
to natural numbers. And we're going to use that function. Define this problem a. And it's going to be the
case that on an input x. So now just think of x as a string. If it's length given in that,
when we take its length, give it to f. If the
output of that is even, then for strings of that length, we're going to define a to equal set. In other words, a of x equals sine x. And if f of the length of x is odd, we just say false, right? Does that string is not in a. So f is going to
increase very slowly, although it's kind of hard to
show it increasing really slowly and get a example picture
how this is going to look. But the idea will be that as you iterate through all
the possible strings, a is going to look like it's
just going to agree with the SAC problem on every
string for very long runs, while f does not change. And then at some point
F will go up by one. It will change from even to
odd when it changes the odd, now we'll switch to the constant false predicate for long
runs, switching forever. So here's kind of an
example of how it looks. Here is just the satisfiability
language, right? Which is just a series
of yes or true, false answers to every
possible string. Then here's the string length 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on. And then here's just an
example of how f might looks. It starts at 0 and then
eventually goes up to 1, and then eventually
it goes up to two. And in reality it's
going to go very slowly, would probably be 0 for a very long time and then
one for a very long time. But I couldn't fit all
that into the example. So then how does that influence
what, hey, it looks like? Well, while f is even so it's 0, it's just going to
look like Saddleback. So a und sagt just
agree on every string. But then when f switches the
odd now acts, it's just false. In other words, none of
these strings or NA. And then oneth increases again, gets back to even now it
agrees with that again. So SAT isn't really being used in a crucial way or we can substitute
any NP-Complete problem. I thought about
presenting it that way, but I don't know. I feel being concrete
is a little easier, but you don't really have
to think about these as being answers to
satisfiability queries. It's just any NP-Complete problem
you right here, this would work. And any problem in P
would work here, right? So we're switching
between making eggs look like an NP complete
problem and making it look like a problem
in NP is just that sac is kind of your standard
NP complete problem. And the constant false
predicate, right? But just say no language. That's sort of the, the
standard easiest problem in NP. But you can substitute
this would be in, say answer is to 3
SAT when f is even. And then answers to
bipartite matching when, when f is 0, that would also work. Okay, Now by careful design of F, we're going to ensure a few things. One, that f is computable in time, polynomial in it, right? And because we need to compute
f to figure out the answer to a that will at least
ensure a is in NP, right? So the nondeterministic
algorithm will be able to run in
polynomial time in order to determine should a look like SAP or shouldn't look
like the empty predicate. We're also going to ensure that no polynomial-time program solves a. So a is not NP, right? That's going to be key of course. And then finally, we're
going to show that no polynomial-time program
reduces clique to a. So a is not NP complete
either, right? If you could show this, this is, knowing that a is in NP, together with an NP-Complete
problem reduces to it, is what it means for
it to be NP-Complete. So if you remember that the time
hierarchy there and that had a similar condition to what
2 and 3 look like here and drain no polynomial-time
program did a certain thing. Here we got to worry about
two things they might do. They might solve a good AMP. We don't want that. They might reduce clique to a showing it's NP-complete. We don't want that. Now as a saint, I'm just using
a concrete example here. I could put any NP-Complete
problem there and it would work. I think the book might use the
same problem for both of these, which I didn't like
because it kinda made it look like they have to
be the same problem. They don't put any
NP-Complete problem here, any problem in P here, and any NP-Complete problem
you want air to prove Stokes.-e 

en-ECS 220 5b_6.6-2 almost proof of Ladner's theorem.txt

Now as I said, this is a
somewhat complex proof. So we're going to start with a
proof that sort of almost works. It's got a high level outline of how we get some of those claims
he talked about before. But we're going to
miss a few details. So the first thing is just
to assume P is not NP. They need that for any of the store. Now, let's imagine the enumerating all the polynomial-time
programs called an Q0, Q1, Q2, et cetera, in some order that
define a as follows. Imagine iterating over
all the binary strings. And we're going to have a
certain notion of a stage. These stages will somehow
correspond to the values of f, that function that F1 appear here. So imagine we're in state 0. If we're in state a and we
start there for every x that we encounter in this
stage and we're going to iterate over x is for
awhile and Stage 0 a, and then we'll switch to Stage 0 B at some point and then continue
at whatever x we are. So for a while will be in Stage
0 and for all those axes, x will equal sapped of x. So this is not an algorithm or
just sort of defining what a is. Now, what we'll do is if on this x, q of x is not equal to sine of x. But then remember we let
a of x these at the x. So in other words, if x is not
satisfiable Boolean formula, and therefore we would
have set x to be 0 if it's not a satisfiable
Boolean formula. But Q0 of x says yes. We'll switch to save 0 b or if it is satisfiable Boolean formula
and Q to 0 that says No. Also we'll switch to state 0 dB. So as soon as q 0, the first polynomial-time
program disagrees with SAT. Then we'll switch. And if P is not NP, this has to hold for every single
one of these kittens, right? Because none of them can
solve SAT if P is not NP. So what does it mean? Well, it means Q0 does not solve a because we made
Q0 disagree with that. We said a to B sat air, but that's not equal
to accuser says so we've kept Q0 from
solving the problem. Heck? Now we'll switch
to the next stage 0 B, and then Stage 0 b. Now, this is corresponds to letting
that function f go up by one. Now we just let ants be false
for all the x's we encounter. We had some initial number
of strings where we did this and then now we started
the next string after that, let ants be false for strings. But each time we're going
to look at clique of x, meaning is x an encoding of a graph and a k such that the
graph has a clique of size k. We just, anyway, any NP
problem can work here. So he does look at this
NP-Complete problem and say, is this different than what? A of q 0 of x ducts? So a couple things to note here. One, note that we have this dual role for the polynomial-time programs. Here I talked about him like the output Booleans for
deciding decision problems. Here I talk about it like the output
strings for doing reductions. So that's just a technicality that makes it a little
easier to talk about it. We could also have said in
the AES stages will only look at functions that will only look
at programs that return booleans. And in these stages will only look at programs that
returns strings. But, you know, you can define
them in some uniform way where it just always
returns a string. And if the string is nonempty, you consider that true. And if it's empty, you consider it false as a Python does, for example, with, with it's sort of
like Boolean interpretation of all it's datatypes. So the point is now we actually
look at the string output of Q0. And then we ask, is that straight not x, but does that string in a or not? And then we ask, is that the same
as what clique says about x? So okay, what's going on here? Why, why do we say that we
want to switch at this point? Well, this is just a
way of saying that q, q 0 does not reduce
clique to edge, right? What would it mean to reduce
clique to a mean on input x? You want to run
through the reduction. If the reductions Q is 0, the output of that will be q of x. And you want that x is in clique
if and only if Q of x is in a. But if we detect that, that condition fails, showing maybe clique is reducible
to a but not through Q0. Q0 is not a proper
reduction of clique to a. If we find this so great, we've prevented Q0 from being a reduction from clique to
a, which is what we wanted. But now that's just one program
that runs in polynomial time. We have an infinite number of
other ones to worry about. And note in particular, whatever q 0 of X is, call it y, maybe before
or after x and the order. Okay, so the other
stages looks similar except they cover other
polynomial time programs. So stage, stages 11, b are about Q1. They ensure that Q1 doesn't solve a, nor does it reduce clique to a stage to ensure as
q2 does not solve a, nor does it reduce
clique to a, and so on. So, well, we needed out of this is that P is not NP, and therefore, you can find eventually a, a QO as an SRA, An x which Q0 and sat must
disagree because that doesn't have any
polynomial time program. So, so what's missing
from this, right? So this kinda looks like
the proof we dated. It looks like none of those
polynomial-time programs because of the a's stages, none of them decide a
because of the bees stages, none of them reduce clique day. So kind of looks like
we got what we wanted. A is not in P, But it's
not NP-Complete either. So here's the missing details. Is a itself in NP. How do we know we don't
just get something undecidable as a
result of doing this, we actually want this to be an NP, to have a non-trivial statement. How do we enumerate all the
polynomial-time programs? The problem and given as input, a program, is it polynomial time
or not, is actually undecidable. So in particular, if we're going
to use this enumeration to, to define a, a had
better be decidable. And so we can't just say, oh, we have to enumerate
all the polynomials and programs in order to
define what a is. Does each stage n, right? So I'm sort of assuming here I argued about why the eighth stages n, but we need that for each queue
for infinitely many n, right? So no matter when we start a stage, we need that there's some bigger
X that will end the stage. To end the eight stages, you need, no matter what x you start at as you iterate through the strings x, from that point, you had better find a bigger one where q
i and sat disagree. And for the bees stages, you'd
better find a bigger one where a clique of x and a
of q i of X disagree. Now both of these are going to use this hypothesis that
p is not equal to NP.-e 

en-ECS 220 5b_6.6-3 clocked programs.txt

So one of the problems
we mentioned with the almost proof of
landowners theorem previously about there being an NP intermediate problem is that
at some point we said let Q0, Q1, Q2, et cetera, be an enumeration of all the
polynomial-time programs which exist. They can be mathematically defined, but at some point, because they're
enumeration in that order will influence the definition
of our intermediate problem a, and we want it to be contained in NP. We need some way of enumerating them. That, that's going to be decidable, that it's going to be computable. So okay, let q i be the EI
program in lexicographical order. For that right now is to find you, I just BDI program, so you just enumerate all
the possible strings. Some of them are valid Python
programs and others aren't. Qi is the eye valid one that the Python interpreter doesn't
find any syntax errors. Now, not all of them
are polynomial time. We only want to enumerate programs
that are polynomial time. But as he said, we cannot simply
enumerate all programs and pick out the polynomial-time ones
that's undesirable to do that. So what we're gonna do
is we're only going to enumerate programs with a
so-called self alarm clock. So those with a header that
defines constants c and k that count their steps and then quit after c times n to the k steps. So let's see an example of that
in action, I'll use Python. So I put a lot of scare quotes there, but I really just referring to
what we're going to round here. So let's imagine we have
a polynomial-time program like this one that computes the
greatest common divisor of a, couple of integers a and b, and then it just calls that function. So let's imagine you have this, this is polynomial time, but it's not a clocked version of it. We're going to make a three times n to the seventh clocked
version of this program. So that time-bound is bigger than
the time this needs, this thing. It is quite a bit faster
than O of n to the seventh. But we're just showing that we
can put a clock on this thing and that will time it
out if it runs too long, even though this one won't run into. So the way we make the clot
version of the programs, we start with the program, but I'm kind of drawn a level sparsely there cuz we're
going to have more code here. So first of all, it has a
header mean just some parts at the beginning that
define this constant c, which is 3, this constant k, the exponent which is seven. And then a couple of
global variables, time and time limit. And the first thing the
program does is it figures out the input length and then
computes the time limit, which is that in this example is three end of the
seventh in general, it's c times n to the k. Okay? And then it assigns them
that global variable. The next transformational
do is before every other statement
in the whole program, we want to count how many
statements we execute will take a statement to be
like one time-step. We add a call to this
function called tick. And then what does tick? Tick is this function, it increments this global
variable time starts at 0 and it just compares time to time
on that than ever exceeds that, it prints timeout and exits. So as long as this timeline that we
wrote down here is longer than the actual
time the program takes. We will never execute. This will never hit exit, right? So we haven't changed the behavior of this program other than to slow
it down by a constant factor. Right? So in particular, we're only going to enumerate
the self clocked programs. So we're going to miss most
polynomial time programs. Most polynomial time
programs don't have this alarm clock
attach to themselves. But here's the key. Any problem in P has infinitely many polynomial-time
program solving. And you take any program that works to start adding comments to it. It doesn't change the behavior, but that's a different program technically that solves
the same problem. And one of them is a self
clocking program, right? For any polynomial time program, there's a self clocked version
of it as we just showed you. And so even if we only include
those were not hitting all the polynomial time
algorithms, but we don't need to. We think of the algorithm as being representative of the
decision problem it solves. We are including all
the problems in P. Is for every problem in P, There is a self clocked program with a big enough value on the clock, bigger than the actual
running time in the program so that,
that program works. And then what's nice about
the self clocked programs? Well, they're all
polynomial time, right? They all track their own time. And they all have a polynomial time at some constant times n raised
to some other constant. So every one of them
is a polynomial time, but we can hit every
polynomial time problem. Okay, So now when I refer to you, I don't mean the EI program in lexicographical order or even
the IT, polynomial-time program. I mean the self clocking
polynomial program. And that's the enumeration
that we're going to use. And of course, it's easy to
enumerate programs in that way.-e 

en-ECS 220 5b_6.6-4 two lemmas and full proof of Ladner_s theorem.txt

So we now want to
make two statements, these two lemmas, and
they're fairly simple. They're going to be useful on
the last slide for this proof. But let's state them
in isolation here. Now, suppose P is not NP, then what do we know? Well, we know sac is not in B, no polynomial-time program salsa. So if we let Q be an arbitrary
polynomial time program, we know that sat of
x has to be unequal to q of x on at least one string. This lemma is claiming
something stronger. It's saying there's
infinitely many strings that Q has to get the
wrong answer per se. Why is that? Pause
and think about it. So suppose it weren't true. Well, in that case, the number of strings that
Q gets wrong is finite. And we could fix to make
it solve SAT exactly by just having a fixed lookup table for those finite number
of counterexamples. And then we would turn Q into
a program that does solve. So what would be its running time? Well, it'll be slower than Q
because it's first step would be to look in this big look-up table
to see is my input in there. Although actually now step
one could just be check the length and see is it
bigger than any string label? Which could just be done by
comparing to a constant length. So you could skip that
check for most strains. And the running time
would essentially be still polynomial time plus a constant to look in
that lookup table. So we would have a
polynomial-time program solving SAT that would
contradict P not equal to NP. So in fact, every
polynomial-time program has to get sat really wrong. It's gotta be wrong infinitely often. Not Lemma 2 is a sort
of a related statement. But now about reductions. Although here we only need an exists is actually
true for infinitely many. Why? But all we need is this exists. And it's that if a is polynomial time decision
problem, but then there's some y. So that clique of y is
not equal to a of q of y. Or put another way, q, this polynomial-time program
cannot reduce clique to a. And that is simply
following directly from the fact that if P is not NP, then no problem in PDA
can be NP-complete. But if this were false, that would be the same thing as
showing clique reduces to a, we should show it is NP-Complete. Okay, so let's go back to our
Hindi intermediate problem, which is not totally
well-defined yet because we didn't say what
this function f is, but we know it's increasing, starts at 0, it goes up slowly. And it's parody tells us whether
a should look like SAP for strings of that length or whether the answer should just be false
for strings of that line. Now by careful design of F, we're going to ensure one that f is computable in
time polynomial in. Which will mean a is
actually in NP, right? We can just run a non-deterministic program that solves sat and also computes F to C. Should we report the output
of SAP or just false. It's also going to
ensure that for all i, where i indexes into our
polynomial time clock programs, there's some y that makes Q I get
the answer wrong on a, right. Or in other words, no
polynomial-time program QI solves a, so a is not in T. And we're also going to
ensure that for all I, the program QI fails to reduce
clique to a for some string y. All right? Time program QI reduces clique day. So that means a is not
NP complete either. Now remember here on this slide, n as the input length for a, and then f of n is going
to be approximately equal, is actually off by a factor two here. But it's, it's, it's related to the index I of the program QI
that we want to defeat, right? By showing it it doesn't solve
AN or does it reduce clique day? Okay, So here is how
you compute f, right? And the definition of f will
give all three of these, that will give us 1, that f is computable in
time polynomial in n. And that's actually established
in that kind of a CIDI way. But this, this makes sense. Self, self clocking. I didn't write it all out. This is just pseudocode here. But imagine that it's
also self clock and it's counting the
total number of steps. And what it does is it says, well, first of all, for n equals 0, you just return 0 and then now you, you make this recursive
call to f n minus 1. And notice all the rest of the return statements that
are either just return rack, so just return the same value
f is not increasing this time. Or if you make it to one of
these return statements, you return Rec plus 1. So making it past the if statement here to one of these
is how f goes up. So notice before we look at all this detail in the
loop, what's going on. After a word F is going to be a self clocking program that just
counts the total number of steps going on air and compares
them to the input n. And if the number of
steps ever exceeds N, to do all this stuff, you just return the recursive value. So this implies that F is going to be computable in
polynomial time, right? We just do this recursive
calls and then at most a linear number of additional steps. So that, that clearly gives
a polynomial time algorithm. Okay? Now how do we get
the other two properties? Well, we're doing this
if statement, right? So we say, well, if QI y is not equal to a of y,
right? Will go up. So this would establish
the statement over here. If this is ever true, right? If this is ever true, that'll hit this condition
and then will increase f. And then when we increase f will go from the stage where f is even
to the stage where f is odd. And, and if this ever becomes true, will increase F yet again. Right? And so that will make it
true for all possible i's so the only way
that these conditions, these conditions
essentially look like the part after the for all ij here. So the only way for this
to fail is that you get stuck on some I write
it's not true for all i. As long as fn keeps increasing. And we're going to use
those previous two lemmas, these data to show it can't
actually get stuck at those lines. So as a reminder, there's
the definition of a. We let Q be some
polynomial-time program. Okay? Recall our first lemma
that because P is not NP, any polynomial-time
program has to get sack wrong and
infinitely many strings. So we can't get stuck here forever. Why? Well, if we did, if we reach some high
where now this is never true again, what would happen? Well, QI y would equal a of y. And because this is an
even stage where we're letting a be the same as SAT. This would actually imply
that q i agrees with a, because it agrees with
AN every single string. From that point on. It agrees with sat on all
but finite be many strings. A doesn't look exactly like SAT. It's sometimes falls, but
if we get stuck here, will never again
enter a false region. And so for all the
strings beyond that, a would just be the
exact same as SAT. And it'll only be a finite number of counter-examples where a
and SAT are different. And that would contradict Lemma 1, which says that no
QRS polynomial time, it has to get that
wrong infinitely often. So because P is not NP, eventually we'll find a y where q and sat and therefore
also a are different. All right, and then Lemma two
says that clique cannot reduce, There's IQ cannot reduce clique to a. And this is a formal
statement of what that means. So here again, we're just
checking this condition. Suppose we got stuck here. Then clique of y would
equal a of QI of why. And what would happen? Well, because we're in
an odd stage, right? A x would just be false
from that on, right? So a would be a language that has only finite the many strings in it. Decision problem terminology would have only finite the
many yes instances. But what does that mean? Well, any language with only a
finite number of strings is, I mean it's regular, right? So it's definitely NP. So then a would be NP if
we got stuck here forever. And Lemma 2 says while
because P is not NP, we can't reduce clique to a. So eventually there's
gotta be some y. That makes this inequality hold. And therefore, we can't
get stuck here either.-e 

en-ECS 220 5c_6.6 why is it hard to prove P neq NP.txt

So we're at the end of the part of the course where we will talk about time complexity and
the big open question, heirs whether P is equal to np. And what we've established is that it seems likely they're unequal, but wow, it's hard to prove. Why is it so hard to prove? All right, what could explain this? So this is a little more
philosophical discussion here. Well, maybe P equals NP, right? We could be wrong. Maybe P equals NP. But the fastest algorithms for NP
complete problems such as SAT, take some obscene
polynomial running time, like ending to the 100. So this could be possible
and this would kind of explain why we haven't
figured this out yet. So maybe the reason
all natural problems and p have running times that are more modest polynomials is that human intuition can only conceive
of relatively simple algorithms. Right? So we've used the time hierarchy theorem to prove that there's
certain artificial, unnatural problems that require time n to the 100 and can't be
solved in time ended at 90. Now, we don't know of
natural problems like this, but maybe they're out there and we're just not
going to figure it out. Because what would the end of the
100 time algorithm look like? It could look a few different ways, but the most straightforward
way to come up with the algorithm that takes time n to the 100 is to have 100
nested for loops, right? So exponential time algorithms
are pretty simple to write down. You do something like for all x in the set of binary
strings of length n, and that's exponential time. But it's kind of a simple algorithm. Simple in the sense it's
easy to understand, not that it's simple to
execute, it takes a long time, but algorithms that take huge running times maybe are
hugely complex and we're just, we don't have the
intellectual capability with our current understanding
to come up with them. So I liken this to the
unintuitive nature of say, relativity and quantum mechanics. Our intuitions evolved to deal with objects about big enough
that we can see the size 1, one millimeter to one
kilometer, Kilometer. Not enormous gravity
wells that can bend light nor tiny sub-atomic
or atomic particles subject to quantum effects. So there's no reason that these
models that seem to work pretty well for those objects ought to be
intuitive, even other accurate. So similarly, there's no
reason to expect that if the most simple algorithms for
SAT or immensely complicated, that we should be able to
figure them out right now. Okay, Here's another reason
why it might be so difficult. Perhaps they're equal, but the
proof is non-constructive, right? So normally how do you prove that? You know a, a problems
such as SAT is NP. You give an algorithm for us. But there's sometimes are
our algorithmic proofs of the form there exists a
polynomial time algorithm. Right? So sort of like the
pigeonhole principle doesn't say which pigeonhole gets to begins. You could imagine a
non-constructive proof that through some
convoluted reasoning, shows there's a polynomial
time algorithm for SAT that doesn't say
what it is, right? It doesn't actually
give you the algorithm. So if we're just trying to prove
this by searching for algorithms, we're not going to find it this one. And finally, if you know a
little bit about formal logic, there's this notion
that a statement can be independent of the so-called
axioms of set theory, meaning with the way that we reason
about proofs in mathematics. Statement can be independent, meaning there's no
proof that it's true and there's also no
proof that it's false. So it's either true or false, but there's no way to resolve it
by trying to prove it either way. So there are statements like this. So the continuum hypothesis
is the most famous example. This is the statement that there are no set cardinality is strictly in between that of the natural
numbers and the reals. So this is known to be independent. There's no proof that it
is and there's no proof that it, that it's false. So okay, this could be possible, but this seemed a lot
less likely to be true for a statement
like P versus NP then for these uncountably
infinite sort of statements, so consider the following statement. I'll call it star. So
the statement star says, for all n bigger than 1000, there's no Boolean circuit with
fewer than n to the log n gates. That solves all clique
instances of size. Okay, so we haven't gotten too much into using circuits
to decide languages. We've studied them as having interesting decision
problems themselves. But there's a notion that I would get up and do a follow-up version
of this course talking about the relationship between an
algorithm or a Turing machine deciding a problem like league
boolean circuits decided. But one of the first things
we would do is establish that if there's a polynomial
time algorithm for clique, then for particular sizes
of clique instances, there are small Boolean circuits, polynomial size Boolean
circuits that can solve clique. So if clique is not NP, then something like
this would be true. So if P equals NP, then star is false. In fact, you can solve clique with small circuit Canadian
polynomial size. So this would not be true for
all n bigger than a thousand. Now if it, if they're not equal, I may have picked the wrong
threshold at 1000 there, but for some large enough threshold, It's probably true and
thousands probably big enough that if P is not
NP, then this is true. Okay? So here's the difference
between these two cases. If star is false, There's actually a proof
of that fact, right? It's huge. What it would do is on the end
that makes this fault right? So if this is false, There's some m, maybe it's 1001,
maybe it's a million. But for that particular n, there would be no Boolean
circuit with this many. Also a million raised to the 20 or fewer gates that
solves all clique instance. So you could prove
that you could simply enumerate every single
Boolean circuit of that size. And then you could execute
it on the clique instance. And you can execute the
exponential time algorithm for clique on that instance and show that it gets one of the
clique instances wrong. So this can actually be improved. It's a huge, probably
would take forever to actually run the verifier for it, but there is a proof of that. So it can't be false. This statement, P not equal to NP, that cannot be false
and independent, right? So theorem saying the
statement P not equal NP, so precisely the statement star. So if this is independent, right? Then it's true. In other words, we would
actually expect that, you know, if they're
actually independent than, than in fact, P is not NP. Because if they are equal, then we can prove that by proving
some statement like this.-e 

en-ECS 220 5c_7 great unifications in science.txt

So this chapter is going to mark a departure and theme from
the earlier chapters. First of all, we're done
talking about time complexity. Now, you could say this chapter
is about computability theory. And it is we'll do some
computability theory. I will do things like
undecidability proofs, but it's also going to get
particularly philosophical. This chapter's a lot about how modern theoretical
computer science came about. How did we come to think of
computation in this way that we do? And the book explores this theme
of great unifications in science. Meaning when did
previously disparate ideas get unified into a single
consistent theory. So one of Newton's insights
was that apples and planets are moving around the way they do and are falling from a
tree or orbiting the Earth. Because of the same universal
law of gravity and motion. Maxwell figured out
that electricity and magnetism are part of a
single electromagnetic field. It's oscillations,
what we call light. Maxwell's equations, were
very useful in choline all the various
disparate observations about electricity and light
and magnetism together. There's still an open Golan, the so-called grand
unified theory that will combine gravity
with quantum mechanics. Sunday the right notes. There's no one story
that explains both. And so these are examples for inspiration and our field
of computer science, a similar unification and accredited
terrain and other people, the terrain was one
of the main drivers. Realize that all the various
models of computation known, it turns time I will study somebody has
general recursive functions, lambda calculus, Turing machines and others all have equivalent
computational power. And so it's possible to build a single unified
theory of computation. And if it works in
one of these models, it's going to work in all of them.-e 

en-ECS 220 5c_7.1-1 the difference engine.txt

So we're going to go back
right now to the middle 1800s. And Charles Babbage was checking astronomical tables and finding a whole lot of errors
and calculation. And this is in the midst of the Industrial Revolution
and he reported they said that he wished these calculations
had been executed by steam. Meeting, had been executed
automatically by some machine. That if it was designed
right, wouldn't make errors. And then he thought, okay, maybe I'll try to
build such a machine. And it wasn't originally intended
to be a general purpose machine. It was based on the following
principle that a lot of these functions that you want to evaluate in certain
physical sciences, for example, astronomy, have what's called a
Taylor series expansion. As you may remember
this from calculus, It's essentially the idea that certain well-behaved functions at certain well-behaved points can be expressed as an infinite
sum of polynomials that converge to the
value of the function. So f can be much more
general than a polynomial. But if you look at it and its
derivative and second derivative, third derivative,
derivative and so forth. At this point a, so that's
just an individual number. And then you plug it
into this expression, which is going to end
up being a polynomial because this will
just be some number, this will just be some number,
this will just be some number. And then you multiply it
by this polynomial term, x minus a raised to
some integer power. For well-behaved functions and
well-being points, this converges. And for some of them it
converges pretty rapidly. So cosine of x, for example, which
is not a polynomial, you just take the so-called
fourth order Taylor expansion, which is first few terms, which are just these. And within this interval
0 to Pi to that, this is within 0.02
of the actual cosine. So it can get pretty close. So if you're happy with approximations, Taylor series is a
great way to do it. And what do you have to do
to evaluate a Taylor series truncated to some fixed number of first terms while
it's a polynomial. But how are you going to evaluate
polynomials automatically, they seem to involve doing
some difficult things like multiplying and
exponentiating and so forth. So Babbage wanted to use this thing called the
method of finite differences. So the key observations, if you have a polynomial and
you look at its value on, on two points that
are one apart, right? So we imagined p of
x and p of x plus 1. If we express what that
is as a function of x, call that delta p of x. It's something like that. Like a discrete derivative
with changeable one. That is a degree n
minus one polynomial. So for example, the
difference between x cubed plus 1 and x plus 1 cubed plus 1. This will expand out to have just an x cubed term
that cancels this. And the remaining terms
are all x-squared or less. So you can imagine you have
some polynomial like this, but you look at delta of that polynomial and its
degree one smaller, it's got an x squared delta of that thing is just linear and
delta that is just a constant. So whatever is the degree, you get, this series of polynomials
that are smaller degree 2, you just get down to a constant. And so you imagine if you want to evaluate this polynomial
at various points, I'm just showing integers here, but it could be done with
floating point numbers as well. Well, you have sort of a base case, which is that to evaluate them on 0, you just look at the
constant term, right? So for 0 it's one here. This one has two, this one
is 10, this one is six, and this one there's
only a constant terms and in fact it's six everywhere. So this looks kind of like
dynamic programming, right? You have this sort of base case here. And now the idea is we can
fill in all the rest of these based just on what we've
calculated so far. So if we rewrite this and
substitute x equals 0, we get that if we add P 0, which is this, and delta p, which is this, we get p1. Do we just add those two integers? And then if we add delta p 0 and delta delta P 0
will get delta P1, right? So we add 10 to 12, we add 10 and 6 to get 16. And then to get the next column. Well, it's the same thing with
x equals 1 P1 plus delta P1, P2, and so on and so on. And we can fill in this whole table
just by adding numbers, right? It's significantly simpler
computation to do. And remember that in turn, if we have a large enough degree
polynomial can approximate very closely just about any kind of function that you
encounter in the sciences. So what Babbage did was to build a machine based on this
principle that could, that could do these
additions of evaluating these polynomials in order to
evaluate arbitrary function. So you just had to come up with the Taylor series
expansion of the function, turn it into those polynomials,
decreasing by degrees. And then program the
polynomial by giving the coefficients by turning
these little rotors here. So this is a fairly
detailed description of how this thing works at this address. If you're curious, I
encourage you to watch that. And I think there's one of these actually somewhere in Silicon Valley. I always wanted to go see. I've never made the trip,
but I think somebody has a replica of this thing
somewhere in Silicon Valley, but there's a few replicas of these in this video we're going
to watch right now, shows an Australian scientist
talking about a replica of the data. The NDP find that because
they want to keep upon by the engine behind me is Babbage's Difference Engine number
2 designed by Charles Babbage, an English mathematician who is also known as the
first computer pioneer. Diabetes designed this
machine 247, 249. Babbage, as we know, did not succeed in completing any of his own engines in their
entirety. So there's By bigger engine, this is the first physical realization
of any of the baby, just complete designs in the metals. The engine itself weighs five tons. It consists of 8 thousand
parts made of bronze, cast iron and steel. And it measures 11 foot
long and eight-foot high. It's operated by cranking a handle. What it does is it
calculates and tabulates the value of any
second-order polynomial. The class of mathematical
expression is 231 decimal places. It only calculates that
with unerring accuracy. It also prints and inked
hard copy as a record of the results and also produces what
are called stereotype plates. That is, it impresses the results
in soft material plus the, in this instance, you can make
it printing like automatically. And the purpose of all this was to eliminate the risk of human error. In the calculation and production
of printed mathematical tables. The machine is operated
by cranking this handle. So you turn this handle and
each cycle of the engine, the machine produces one result. So you just keep cranking your set the initial conditions
up on the figure wheels, on the numbered wheels,
you turn the handle. What happens when you turn the
handle is it drives this cam stack. And if you'd like, this
is the micro program. This is the device that orchestrates
all the internal motions of the machine to get it to form the repeated additions
that are needed for them. The method of differences, which
is the principle it is using. So you turn the handle in terms these camps tax the
28 separate camps. And that's what determines
the internal timing and the orchestration of all the mechanical movements
of the whole machine. So that'll be like the
guts of the machine, the internal Michael program. And what the machine does is it adds a three digit
number on one column, and it progresses through
the machine adding from column to column to column
and the tabular value, the result ends up on the
very last column, 31 digits. So you crank the handle, each cycle of the engine, that's four turns of the handle, it cyclically engine produces
the next result on this column. So the end process, the end product of that whole process is 31 digit number on this column. So we take the 31 digit result from the end of the machine
at the end of the cycle, and it is automatically
transferred to this apparatus, which is the output apparatus.
It does two things. It prints on hard copy In Ink, taught copy, 31 digit result as a checking copy so that you know
actually what you've canceled. At the same time it impresses results on soft material
in these traits. So inside there there are things
called stereotype punches, which are number wheeled, which
are lowered into the tray, the trade and moves, it lowers again. And so the lines build up. Firstly, it's on display here at the Computer History
Museum for one year. It's aren't alone from
the owner of the machine, which is Nathan move old, who commissioned the machine. It paid for the machine to be built. And so it's here for you and then it goes into his
private collection. What we will do with it is
demonstrated for people, will work on it's own
research machines, so it will be adjusted and worked on. We get experience about
how the thing operates. Also part of the reason now that
it is here and it does work. And we have for the first
time that Babbage engine, that is to do some
research into, say, was it a practical proposition
if babies had one, could they have successfully
produce tables? Babbage was not an
impractical dreamer. This machine works as
he intended to work. What's the entire enterprise of using the infallibility of machinery
to produce printed tables. Was it realistic? Could
it have been done? And for the first time in history, we're in a position to
actually answer that question.-e 

en-ECS 220 5c_7.1-2 the analytical engine.txt

The difference engine
was an amazing design, but it was quite special purpose. So just calculated polynomials to
a certain degree of precision, which can be used to
calculate a lot of other functions through their
Taylor series approximations. But what Babbage realized as weight, you could do quite a
bit more if you could automate computation that sense. And so it inspired him to think of this more complex design or something he called
the analytical engine. And this had essentially everything we think of in modern computers other
than the electricity. So this is like, but the steam pump novels like this
is kind of what people imagine, you know, computers might
have looked like had they actually been
built in the 1800s. It had what's called a store, which we recognize the memories
of 1050 digit integers. Or we might call that a register
with a certain number of bits. Some called the mill. This was basically the CPU. It could do addition, subtraction,
multiplication, division. It was programmable
using these punch cards. So you might have heard
of punch cards being how people tried to program computers in the 60s while they
came from this other technology, which is called the Jaccard blue. Where are these punch
cards would describe a pattern that you
wanted to loom to weave into a woven pattern and
they were extremely complex. I mean, this is actually a pattern woven by a Jaccard loan
showing a picture of Jaccard. And he's cards had
variables that could copy numbers into the mill operations given an instruction execute. And you had these so-called
combinatorial cards, which had the construct
control structures we would recognize
if then statements, gotos and for loops. So, so this is what Babbage
imagined could be used to really expand the automation of computation for say,
computing scientific tables. But it was realized. How much further? And said, Hey, here's a quote from the same. Essentially. And meeting the
analytic decides who's right. So basically any object
relations strand that spreads monies home regions. So for example, represent sound, represented CDs. Then she met with the engine, might be able to
hunger and lows news. This is some video. If you do just showing some
algorithm being what's happening, my algorithm then add it to them. And a lot of people over Fernando, as the first computer program moves, this theater was never modeled. You can write a program, whether she wrote the first
programs for the analytic engine. And this shows a program describing how to compute something
called Bernoulli numbers. I went and tried to look for a simple description of Bernoulli numbers. They're not really
simple description. This might have been
why she wanted this as a demonstration of the power that, you know, there's no simple
like little formula for them. So this is the kind of thing you
have to express algorithmically. And this is a description of the Analytic Engine
programmed people. Now unfortunately, machines in
the 1800s were not precise enough to enable the construction of
a reliable analytic engine. What happened was Babbage
tried to get money from the British government
to fund this thing. They gave him some, but then
they pulled the funding. They were happy with the
progress, never got built. And so that it just kinda
dive there for awhile. But this idea of a universally
programmable computer came up again independently by a totally
different group of actors in the 1930s who were thinking
about a much different question, a much less practical
sounding question. To, which is this abstract question about the foundations of mathematics.-e 

