en-ECS 220 6a_7.1 axiomatic foundation of mathematics.txt

So there was this big
project proposed by this famous German mathematician
David Hilbert when he addressed the International Congress of Mathematicians that 9800, right? It's kinda like in 2000 we had
declared Millennium Prize Problems. Hilbert did, did a similar
thing a 100 years before, laid out 23 problems he thought were very foundational
fundamental problems that, that mathematicians should try to
tackle over the coming century. And some of them took the better
part of that century to resolve. Some of them are still unresolved. So Hilbert's tenth problem was this. And it says specify a procedure. Now they didn't really
have this word yet. That's part of what we're
talking about in this chapter is how did we come to define
what we mean by procedure? But just think algorithm, I guess I just thank program in your favorite
programming language. He said specify a procedure
which in a finite number of operations enables one to determine whether or not a
given DO fan tiny equation. So a polynomial equations with integer coefficients
with an arbitrary number of variables has an integer solution. Now, note something curious
about is he's not even bothering to ask whether
such a procedure exists. Is very optimistic here, right? He just thought, well,
clearly there is a way to do this and he just
set out the goal to be, find it like what's the algorithm you can follow to figure out whether a multivariable polynomial
has an integer solution. Now, many decades later, he proposed another problem, even more ambitious and even more optimism that he thought it
obviously had a solution. It's called the incidence problem, which in German means
the decision problem. And the problem he said is solved. One does a procedure that
allows one to decide the validity of a given
a logical expression by a finite number of operations. So here, think of the
phrase validity of a given a logical expression
that has meaning that the truth or falsity of a
mathematical statement. You want an automated
theorem prover that can prove or disprove any mathematical
statement you can write down. For example, pause and see if you, you know what this mathematical
statement corresponds to. There exists x, y, z, n in the non-negative
integers so that n is at least three and x to the n plus y to the
n plus z to the n, x equals e to the antibody. So a sub-question for both of these, Hilbert's tenth problem in 1900 and the enshrinement
problem later is, what's exactly, what exactly
do they mean by procedure? What exactly does that mean? So suppose that weren't
possible to find it. How would you prove that
there's no procedure? You'd have to know what
precisely you mean by the word procedure to know
whether or not one exists. So the goal of this, this sort of enshrined in
this problem is to set an axiomatic foundation
for mathematics, right? To, to reduce all of mathematics to peer set theory and logic and create a formal system powerful enough to prove all the
mathematical facts there. So. This is what mathematical
logic looks like. And I often think of mathematical
logic of being something like it's sort of like
Mathematical Anthropology. It's like mathematicians
studying what it is that mathematicians do when
they're doing mathematics. So to, so to do that you have to take all the concepts that map
editions normally use. Integers, real numbers, sets, functions and relations,
partial orders, all that stuff. And you've got to define what
exactly are those things and its simplest if you can
define them all in terms of just some primitives
that you build up from. And it turns out all those can
be defined using only sets. So one example is that if you have nothing but
the concept of a set, you don't have much,
You have the empty set. You haven't talked about any
other kind of object yet. So you have just the empty set, but you don't have any other
objects you defined yet. So how could you possibly go
about defining other things? Well, you have the empty set, so you can put it in another set. You can talk about the set
containing the empty set. And then you can talk about
taking that object and consider the set
containing only it, right? So these singletons sets that
are kinda recursively nested. And this could be used to define
the natural numbers, right? You could say the natural
number we're just going to identify with the empty set. We're going to say one is
the set containing only 0, containing only one, and so on. So this is one way to just say
what are the natural numbers? Well, they correspond to this
infinite hierarchy of sets. And now you didn't have to talk about any object other than a set here. And once you've defined sets, you can also define
ordered pairs, right? So a set gives you the ability
to talk about an unordered pair. A comma b has two elements,
but there's no order. B comma a is the same set, but you can encode an
ordered pair by also including a set telling you which
of these two should be the for. So the set, the
singleton a and the set, the set containing both a and B. It tells you what both elements
are and which ones the first, so that's an ordered pair. A function is defined
by its graph, right? The graph is the set of ordered
pairs input comma, output. So this is the set right here defines the function n-squared
sequences, right? Infinite sequences can be
defined by the function f of n equals the nth
element of the sequence. You can define a real number
as a pair of sequences. One is the digits on the
left of the decimal point, the others the digits on the
right of the decimal point. And on the left it would
be a finite sequence. On the right it could be infinite. So you can define anything that
these are just some examples. Anything you want can just be
defined using only, right? So you just have to wrap your head
around the intuitive concept of a set and everything else
can follow from that. But let's pause there. What exactly is a set though? Like best is the one thing
that we have to somehow take on faith that such a
thing called sets exist. So Russell's paradox came from
thinking about this problem. What objects exactly is
it that sets can contain, you can contain other sets. We did that on the last slide, so, okay, assets can
contain other sets. You've all encountered
the power set, right? That's a set of subsets of another's ad sets can
contain other sets. Sure that Ought to be allowed, especially
if we're starting with only sets. But it sets can contain other sets. Kinda set contain itself.
Can you have a set S? So S is contained in S, right? It's not clear what that would
mean exactly, but it's just, if you're just defining
this element of operation that between sets
and things that they contain. And if the things they
contain can be other sets, then you're going to
have the same type of object on each side of that relation. So suppose that you will add this. He said You're going to have
sets that contain themselves. But then some sets don't
like the set 1, 2, 3. It does not have, you know, it only has three elements
and none of them are the set 123 individual editors. So you have some sets that contain themselves and others that
don't if this is possible. So define Rs is the Russell said, this is a little bit hard to read. This is the set of all sets, right? Instead of all sets that
don't contain themselves. Okay? If this is allowed in
this set can be defined. So what, you know, what's going on here? Well, you can ask this question, is our Russell set is, are contained within itself or not? Well, if it contains itself, then it would not be an
element of this set. But this set is r. Therefore, r would
not be contained in. But if r is not contained in art satisfies the condition of this set. So it should be in there,
but then R would be contained in R. So you
get a contradiction. R cannot be defined
essentially because it could, you'd have this paradox
and this contradiction. So one solution to this is what's called a restricted
set comprehension. And the idea here is I
just said the set of all sets that don't
contain themselves. But usually when we talk
about the set of all objects, we usually sort of say, we're taking them
from some larger set. So we're saying, you
know, so the primes, for example, you tend to
talk about it's the set of all positive integers that
obey a certain constraint. You're not taking
them from the set of real numbers are the binary string. So restricted set comprehension means when you write set
comprehensions like the US, meaning the set of all objects
that obey some constraint. You have to first specify a bigger
set you're taking them from. And then this is
specifying a subset of it. So here are some subset of
aids got some things from a, but not all and not the
ones that satisfy this. So after Russell pointed out that the problem with allowing this
unrestricted set conference. So the point is this then would
prevent the paradox because now you first have to
define this bigger set. And before you've defined
that are doesn't exist. So our couldn't possibly
be one of the things that year pulling from a to test whether
it's going to be and are not. So based on trying to fix
little problems like this, the logicians weren't and
came up with a set of so-called axioms and the states
how sets are supposed to behave. And we're, this is not part of this sort of official
material for the course. I just wanted to show it to you
that it is possible to say, okay, what are the things we
have to assume or truth sets? And from that we can get all
the rest of mathematics. And this appears to be enough, right? So some of them are a
little complicated, but summer are fairly
easy to understand the, the axiom of infinities as there's a set with infinitely many elements. The axiom of pairings
is for any two sets, x and y, There's a set that
has both of them as members. So note that all of
them start with a for. All right, this is a
statement all said. So it's all sets x also too. I have to obey this constraint. This is all set z and all sequence sequences events That's w1 to wn
obey this constraint except one. There's one said there's one
acts in the axiom of infinity, gives you the first set, right? So this says there is a set
with infinitely many elements. And then all the other
axioms start with a for all. So what this does is it
gives you a way to just declare some set exists. That's axiom number 6 declares
that this set exists. And sometimes people
take this domain. This is the set of natural numbers, but there's some said that exists. And then these give you a
way to build other sets. They say if these sets can be fat, for any sets that you can define, you can define a new set, right? So for all x and y, there exists a z that pairs
x and y together, right? So, okay, so this is going to
be the general theme and we're going to think about
the sort of computationally. So when we wanted to find what
do we mean by computation? So we're imagining we're
in the early 19th century. We don't yet know what procedure
or algorithm means exactly. We're going to follow
this approach of defining some sort of atomic
computational operations. And then define a
computable operations to be any way of composing on. And people had proposed a variety
of solutions to this problem. Lambda calculus was
proposed by church. The general recursive functions were being pushed by Godot and
somebody named her brand. And there are generalization of
another thing that's now called primitive recursive functions
and Skolem and define. And then Turing machines
were devised by terrain. Of course he didn't call
them Turing machines, what we call an interview machines. And it turns out all these
definitions are equivalent, right? They all capture the exact
same class of computations. And, okay, and they
could be equivalent, but still not capture everything
we can do in the real world. But the Church-Turing thesis states that they do that anything that could quote reasonably recall the
computation can be done by days. So one of turns, big achievements in 1936 was to show the so-called halting
problem is undecidable. So this is the problem given an
algorithm isn't going to halt, or there's another variance of that. So that in turn means that this insight into problem that
Hilbert proposed is undecidable. Because remember the Enchantments
problem was figure out an algorithm where you can write down any mathematical statement you want. And that algorithm, we'll figure
out whether it's true or false. Well, one example of a mathematical statement is
this Turing machine halts. You can encode that as
a mathematical theorem. But since it's not decidable to
figure out if it halts or not. If you supposedly had this universal theorem
prover solving the problem, it could figure the truth or falsity of that statement,
but terrain grooved. No algorithm can do that. So Hilbert was somewhat devastated by this is
ruined his whole program. But, you know, the, the authors of the
textbook say they find it quite limited, liberating, right? So there's essentially
mathematics will never end. We're not going to be
able to automate it with an algorithm that just does
the job of mathematicians.-e 

en-ECS 220 6a_7.2-1 programming languages with interpreters have non-halting programs.txt

Now you hear about fact, like the halting problem is not
decidable and you can't take a given Turing machine or Python program and determine
whether it's going to hold. And you might think, well,
maybe we should just switch to a different programming
language, right? One where all the programs
hall and we don't have this problems if you write a program that's guaranteed to hold. So what we'll argue here is that
if you're a programming language, Let's programs, run other programs. Then in that programming language, some programs must be non halting. So, you know, what's a program, one of the other programs or
operating systems do this. Web browsers with JavaScript do this, or more generally, you know that they have a JavaScript interpreter. More generally, any decent
programming language has an interpreter, right? Otherwise known as
a universal program in the language of
theoretical computer science. It's a program you, so that given two inputs, one is a description of a program P, and the second is an input
you'd want it to be, it runs it T on that input x
and does what it would do. So that's essentially
what an interpreter does. So suppose your programming language has an interpreter
or you can do this. So consider defined in a
Boolean return type program V. So like a Python function
V and what is V2? Well, oninput p, where p is say the source code
of another program. Where V does is it
runs p on input peak. Meaning if it runs be an input, it gets it is its own source code. And saying programs can
take other program doesn't, but their interpreters do that. And in this language,
we're assuming v has this power to take as input
a program and then run it. But then run it where it's input is itself another program
and at the same program. So that's what V does. It seem like kind of a useless task. But now let's answer this question. Does that, but then what
does it do with that? Well, if P returns symbol
and then V negate. So whenever P returns, when given itself as input, if it ever does return, v will simply negate the
return the opposite. So what now is the
output of v on itself? What have we were to run B with
its own source code as well. It's not well-defined because supposedly it takes v0 runs in
an input V in negates that, but what's the output? Is it true or false? So you'd get a contradiction no matter which one
of those with them. The way out of this is that, well, it must be the case that if you
run V on input v, It won't hold. All right, so in other words, any programming language powerful enough to write an interpreter for itself must necessarily contain
programs that don't hold. So this notion of universality
implies non holding programs.-e 

en-ECS 220 6a_7.2-2 countability and diagonalization.txt

And we'll get back to
computability in a bit. But first we're going to
dive a little bit into a little bit older
mathematical technique that preceded the development of
the computability theory. But this technique proved crucial in developing
computability theory. And this had to do with fairly
straight forward looking question, which is, how do you compare
the size of two sets? All right, well, if
they're finite sets, it's easy the sizes like a number, and you just compare the numbers. If a has four elements in B as three, then a is at least as big as B. Fact it's bigger. But we know that well, we can get this equivalent
characterization, which is that the size
of a is at least that it be if there's an onto
function from a to b. So this is a on the left
here, this B on the right. We can describe a function by kind of drawing arrows from elements
of a to elements a, b. And an onto function is one where everything in B has an
arrow coming into it. And that's possible to do if and only if the size of a
is at least that a, B, B add more elements, there wouldn't be enough
arrows to cover it. Now, this notion of
the size of the set as an integer makes sense
only for finite sets. But this notion on the right makes
sense for any sense whatsoever. So we can take this as a definition
of what it means for a to be at least the size of B for any
sets including infinite ones. And, you know, with this
definition in mind, we can ask a question like, is the number of
non-negative even integers at least the number of
non-negative integers, right? It's a subset of it. But pause and think
about this for a second. Well, that amounts to
being able to show that there's an onto function
from the even integers, from the even non-negative integers to all the non-negative integers. And you can do that by just dividing each one of them by two, right? That will map onto
the naturals because every natural number is some
even integer divided by two. So in fact, even though
it's a subset is size is still the least that
as big, as big as that event. Similarly, clearly the set of real numbers is at least as big
as the real numbers between 01. But what about the other
way by this definition? Well, according to this definition, pause and think about this. If you haven't seen it before. We want to be able to
find an onto function. And there's a lot of ways to do this. But essentially I
think something like some modification of
arctangent pulled this off. So essentially any function that
is only defined between, say, 01, but it goes up as the
input approaches 0, it asymptotically goes
down to infinity. And as the input approaches one, it asymptotically
goes up to infinity. So that would be a function that maps onto all of the real numbers. Every real number can be hit by
specifying something between 0 and What about the power set of N, the set of all natural numbers? This are the set of all subsets of natural numbers and
the unit interval. So this one, the way I like
to see this is we can map each subset of n onto a binary number. And it's the number where the set of ones and the binary number, right? So it's a binary
number like 0 dot and then some infinite sequence
of zeros and ones. And it's the positions
of the ones are the, the elements of the set, right? So if for example you had
the prime numbers 235711, you'd have ones at positions 2, 3, 5, 7, and 11, and so forth. And any real number between 01, you could express in that way by
just specifying what's the subset of integer positions and have a
one and they're binary expansion. So what about this? So the, the natural numbers compared to the power set
of the natural numbers. So this one, you know, if you've seen this before,
you know the answer. If not, you know, in fact, the answer to this one is
no, these other three, yes, that this infinite set is at least the size
of this infinite set. And in fact, in all
cases it goes both ways. They have equivalent sizes
by this step in addition, but not for and then the power
set of the natural numbers. So this was the theorem
Cantor proved in the 1800s. And it's that the set of
natural numbers has struck size strictly less than the
power set of natural numbers. In other words, its size
at most that right, there is an onto function
from p of n to n, but there is no undo
function from N to P. So again, pause the VMs and
think about why is this true? What could be the, the
way you prove that? Okay, So we're going to prove this. And it's an interesting
theorem in its own right, but we're mainly interested
in the technique to be. So. So here's the statement. No function from N
to P of n is on two. In other words, every
function from N to P of n misses some subset of n. There exists a subset of the
natural numbers so that for all possible inputs n to F, f of n is not equal to that
subset is. How do we show this? So this proof is very
short, but very tricky. So we'll just write it down and then we'll kind
of look at a picture. So this is in fact the entire
proof here. It is in one line. For all natural numbers n, Let S sub n equal f of that. Right? Just what's the out, what set of natural numbers does
f output when input and call that the end of the nth set that produces some subset
of the natural numbers. Now, define a new set S. This is going to be the set
that is not in the range of f. F cannot map to it. This is the set of all
natural numbers n, So n is not contained in S of it. So the claim that S is
not in the range of f because we have defined, defined it to be so,
so the easiest way to see this is by making a table. So we imagined in this table on, along the top is all the
possible inputs to f, right? And then along the columns is
all the possible outputs of f. And each output of f is a
subset of natural numbers. And what we're gonna do here
is identify each subset of natural numbers with its so-called
characteristic sequence. So this is a binary sequence, is an infinite binary sequence, and it has ones exactly if that position is
a natural number in the set. So maybe as zeros the empty set, it has zeros everywhere. Maybe S1 is the set of
all natural numbers. It has 1s everywhere. If S2 is the set of
even natural numbers, they would have ones on all
the even natural numbers and zeros everywhere else, right? Maybe S3 is the set of
odd natural numbers. Maybe as far as the set of prime. So it says 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 and zeros everywhere else. So depending how f is defined, whatever subsets of N and outputs, that means you get a certain infinite sequence in
each of these rows, one for each input to end. So what did we do
defining S In this way? What we did is we looked at an input n and then
the output of f on n, and we related those. So what we're doing is we're
essentially looking along the diagonal and we're defining has to be the
opposite of the diagonal. Right? So if n is not contained in S sub N, there's a 0 here, so 0 is not
contained in S, 0 is a 0. So that means we put it in the S, meaning Ss characteristic sequence has a one there and is in the tes, but then one is contained in S one, write the set output F on input one, it's as all the natural numbers, so it also has one. So we don't put it into S. In other words, we have a 0 there. And so we're essentially
looking at the diagonal. And that itself is a sequence of bits and we're just defining S to be the bitwise complement of that. So what does that mean? Well, it means that x
cannot equal any of these rows because S
disagrees with each of these rows and at least 1 wherever they meet
along the diagonal. So we're one of the
rows, say it's S3. Well, what is the fourth element? S says it's 0, but as three pairs, I was the third element. S says it's 0, but AS3 says it's one. So S cannot be the third row, but it can't be any other row
either or in other words, S is not in the range of f. It is not any of the
sets output by F. So that function f cannot be onto. So based on this observation, we, we say, okay, well, n and the
power set of N are both infinite, but the power set of
N is somehow bigger. So then can't candor defined the size of n to tip
to say that n is. These are like the counting numbers, but P and NP and bigger
is uncountably infinite. You can't count the outputs
that come out of there. So you can count that the
subsets of natural numbers by putting them into one-to-one correspondence
with the National Archives. Now, I phrase this
like it's only for n. It helps to see the diagonalization When you're
talking about the natural numbers. But actually nothing in this proof as anything special about
the natural numbers, I could have just put
any set a whatsoever error and its own power set, right? And this shows the exact same thing. It says that for any set a, the cardinality of a is strictly less than the cardinality
of the power set of a. Again, that's obvious
for finite sets, like any set of three elements has eight elements and its
power set in general, n element set, set two to
the n possible subsets. But this proof shows it's even
true for infinite sets if we take this definition using
the onto functions to, to be what we mean by
comparing the sizes sets. So this is the
diagonalization technique. And it's useful for, for
proving results like this. But now let's come
back to computability. And let's look at this
argument we made earlier about how do you programming
languages where you can write interpreters must have
non halting programs. That was a diagonalization. So consider what we did. We looked at programs and inputs, but then we defined
a special program, or the only kind of
input it ever gave to a program was the source
code of another program. So if we're going to do that
and we're going to consider all the programs you can
write in our language. And then we're going to
consider all the inputs, but the only ones we care about, our inputs that are themselves
encodings of programs. Then what we get is
this infinite 2D table listing all the
possible programs that we can run and all
the possible program source codes that we could give
them is input when we run it. And let's consider that
they all return Boolean. So say these are just Boolean return that functions in some language. While what did we do? We defined this program V to be such
that on into a p.sit, it would take the program
P would run it on input P, and it would negate that. So what it did is it was looking
at the diagonal of this table. It was looking at all the programs
and what they would do if you ran them on themselves as input, and then it negated that. And therefore v cannot be any of
the rows in this program, right? If it were the third row, you'd have a contradiction. This is either true or false. This is the negation, so
it can't be the third row, it can't be any rattle. In other words, if you can make
a well-defined v like this, it cannot be one of the
programs in your language, but you can write v
as long as you can write an interpreter because
you're going to use Vi to turn around and oninput P1, r1, v1. And so the only way out of this, the only way that we don't get
a contradiction here is that the values here are not
just true and false, that some of these can be undefined
if they're undefined, right? V Running T3 and input P3. If that never halts, the won't halt either. They're both be undefined. We can only cause v
To negate it if you actually get a real answer
out of it, a Boolean, it.-e 

en-ECS 220 6b_7.2-1 halting problem.txt

So we've alluded to
this halting problem that terrain showed with undecidable. Let's define it a bit more formally. Now, it, I'd said it's about
detecting whether programs halt. Well, programs take inputs sometimes. So what's the input? Now there's a bunch of variance
or the halting problem, and we'll look at some
of them on the homework. But for now, let's define
the halting problem. The one is language we call halting to be the one that's
given two inputs, a program P and an input X to P. So an input in the
format that P expects. And the question is, will p.sit
hold when we run it on input x? Or put another way, if p has some notion of
output when it holds, is the output well-defined? Now we haven't defined
this class yet, so I'll say deck is the
class of decidable problem, the decision problems
that are decidable by some program with no bounds whatsoever on the time
or the memory you need. So you just need that holds with an answer eventually on
all input instances. And this is terrains famous
theorem that halting is not indicate is not a
decidable problems. No algorithm can figure this out. So what default in Word a cycle? Alright, suppose that weren't true and there was this
program called halts. So that for every program P
and input string x to be, if you called halts
with input p and x, it would tell you exactly
whether Px holds. Well, this would be
handy for debugging. Of course, compilers could
warn about infinite loops, but they will have much more
profound uses done this actually consider calling halts p.sit
with just a garbage input. This is going to be a program
that just ignores it simpler. So just give it the
empty string as input, where P is this program. But pause and think about
what this program does. If it ever halts, it's going to resolve a
major mathematical problem. So I just look at it for a second
and figure out what it does. And we can talk about it in
lecture time if you want. Okay, so we're going to prove now that halting is not decidable
and we're going to use terrains. Original proof though phrased
a little bit differently. So I like doing this isn't
proof by contradiction. So let's suppose for the
sake of contradiction that the program halts exists. I like the proof by contradiction
because it gives us this concrete program halts
that we can get our hands on. We can use it. We can call it as a subroutine
and other programs, right? So if this thing existed, we could write this very
simple program that calls Paul to the subroutine. It's called Catch-22. And it expects its
input to be a program, not a program and an input, just a program. It's
only got one input. And it calls halts, but
halts takes two inputs. The first one is supposed
to be a program. It gives P as in, but, but the second one and expects a string of the kind
you'd get to p. Well, we're just going to
give the source code of P itself as the second. And so we're asking, if you were to run p in the string input you gave it is
the source code of p itself. What would it do? What a halt. And what catch-22 will
do with B is that if p would halt when
given itself as input, catch-22 is going to do the opposite. It'll loop forever. But if P will not halt
on input P and halts can tell us that then catch-22
will immediately return. So it will hold. So now here's the question. What's going to happen if we run
catch-22 in the input we give it is the source code for
the program catch-22 itself. So let's think about
what it's gonna do. It's going to ask the halts program, would catch-22 halt
with Catch-22 as input. If so, loop forever, otherwise, ALT, so Catch-22 on its own, it on the input itself halts if and only if it does novels
a contradiction. So what's wrong with this? Well, if faults existed, we could easily write this program. So it must be that the halts
program does not exist. In other words, halting
is not decidable. The halting problem is not decidable. So it may not look exactly like it, but this is yet another example
of the diagonalization technique. So one way to see that is
to consider that we can list on the left side here all the possible programs where we
might want to ask do they hold? And up here we can list all the possible inputs we
might give to those programs. And we ask, Does it
hold on those inputs? And for this proof, the only kinds of inputs we're actually going to consider are going
to be the kind that look like source coder programs. So you could imagine there's a lot of other binary strings
that don't look like source coder programs will just filter only down
to the ones that do. So. Now, you know the, the rows and columns here
are kind of the same type. And so we fill in this infinite table where I'm not saying there's
an algorithm to do, I'm just saying that this
table exists mathematically same for each program
and each input to it. That's the source code
or some other program. Would it, with this program
halt with this input? Maybe this one never halts. Maybe this one always holds, and the others kind kinda
depend on their input. So catch-22 is this program, so it should be some row
of this table, right? It has some, if it exists, it has some behavior on
every possible input, including the inputs
that are programs. But we've defined it to be the exact opposite the
diagonal of this table. So it cannot actually be one of the rows of the table or
you get a contradiction. When you, when you
look at the diagonal element that it intersects. But since it's a valid program, if halts exist, halts
doesn't exist either.-e 

en-ECS 220 6b_7.2-2 showing problems are undecidable by reduction from halting problem.txt

So turns proof that the halting
problem is undecidable. A lot like Kanter's proof that there are more subsets
of natural numbers. The natural numbers, it's very short, but very tricky, right? It seems like a very difficult
idea to come up with. And it's not the kind of thing
we necessarily want to repeat. For every problem that we're
trying to show is undecidable. So there's an analogy to
be made here, NP hardness, which is that it took a
lot of work to prove that this original problem
circuit SAT is NP hard. But once you know it is, the easy way to show new
problems are NP-hard, is not to repeat the
full simulation of a nondeterministic Turing
machine using a Boolean circuit. It's to use reductions. And so you have this notion of a polynomial-time computable function that define your notion of reduction. And you reduce circuit saf to other problems to
show their NP complete. And the kinds of data we deal with are all kinds
of discrete data formulas, graphs, lists of integers. And now we have an analogous situation where our
sort of original hard problem, the one that's the most
difficult to show is, is undecidable, is halting. And we're going to use this
notion of reductions as well. Now we don't require them anymore to be polynomial time computable. Most of the ones we'll
talk about will be, there'll be actually very easy to compute, but we don't require that. They don't need to be. And to show other
problems are undecidable. We're not going to repeat the
diagonalization technique. Instead we're going to
reduce halting to them. Or once we've collected a list
of other undecidable problems, we can use those and
we can reduce those to a new problem to show the
new problem is undecidable. And a lot of the examples we'll see, the questions are going to be questions about the
behavior of proof. There's other undecidable problems, but this is kinda the most
straightforward thing to start with. So let's start with another
variant on the halting problem. And this is called the, the no input halting problem, right? Or I call the hauled
him sub epsilon here. And here. Instead of the input being a program and an input is just a program. And I call it the no input halting because it's
essentially what if you gave cue like the trivial
and just the empty string. So essentially you're not asking what it's gonna do
on an arbitrary input. You just want to know, if you ran
it with empty, what would it do? What a halt on that one input or not. So this is clearly reducible to the more general
halting problem, right? If you had an algorithm for the
more general halting problem, that can answer this question about
programs and arbitrary inputs. Well, you could just ask
him this question and the second input you give would
be the empty string epsilon. So, so if we gets all halting, we could use that to solve this. But this looks like a
very special case of it. It seems like not to be as difficult
as the full halting problem. But we're going to show it is, It's also undecidable by
showing the reduction in the other way that we can reduce
halting to this special case. So we'll show that if we could
solve this epsilon halting problem, then we could solve the
full halting problem. So the reduction is
going to look like this. Given an input of the
form halting expects, which is a program P and an input X. To give to the program. We want to output an instance
of the halting epsilon problem, which has just a single program. And here it is, Here's the
program we're going to output. I've called it Q sub px. And that's to emphasize
that both p and x are sort of hard-coded
into the program. And in the super high
level pseudo-code, it's not clear what this
means is run p on input x. And you'll notice q takes
an input, ignores it. But where do p and x come from? So just to be concrete,
let's use Python. So here is a Python implementation of Euclid's algorithm for
greatest common divisor. So let's imagine we wanted to
solve the halting problem here. Then our program P would be this
source code over here for GCD, our input x maybe would be 624. We want to figure out what's
the greatest common divisor of these two numbers above that? Well, that's what we'd want
to do if we're running velocity actually are by students. Just if we ran GCD with the
Zen book wouldn't hold. Now we know it does. Taught, we showed at all. It's actually pretty quickly. But let's imagine we
want to transform this into an instance of the
epsilon halting problem. So we want to output a single program that if you run it
on the empty input, it'll halt if and only if the stones. So you can imagine if you go in here and introduce an infinite loop, well then the new program would
have an infinite loop two. So here's what it looks like. It takes an input Y, but
it just ignores it, right? So it's going to do the same thing no matter what input you give it, meaning it will do the same
thing on input epsilon. And what does it do? Well,
it has this whole program P, this greatest common divisor
function just hard-coded into it. And it's got that a 1624. These are just hardcoded
constants as well. So on input y just ignores its input. It turns around and cause
this program down here, this Python function
on this one input. And then notice that P over here, or just write p on input x
is going to hold if and only if Q px halts on input epsilon. So, so we've gotten what we wanted, which is that the
answer to the question, does Q px halt on the empty input is the same as
the answer to the question, does p all on input x. So let's see another
undecidable problem. So again, it's a question about the behavior of a program
has a lot of these are this one. The question is, were given a program and we're not given as input, an input to the program, but we still want to
know something about the behavior of this program
and one of its inputs and its, Is there an input Y, you can get it. That will cause it to output 42. Let's suppose it as an
integer return type. So this is also undecidable as is basically any question about
the behavior of a program. So to show it's undecidable. Now we're going to show that
halting epsilon reduces to it. That's sufficient because
we already showed halting epsilon is undecidable. So here's the reduction. We want to know. Given input peer program, does it halt on the empty string? So to reduce that to
this 42 question, the reduction is going to
output this program QP, that depends on the right. So it's got P sort
of encoded into it. And what does it do? It turns around, it just
runs p on the empty string. And if that ever
halts, it returns 42. It outputs this thing. And note that if p doesn't called, then it never halts. So in particular it never returns 42. So here's a concrete
example just to show you what By we're hard-coding p into q. Well, suppose that your program P or this Python program that FLM
is Fermat's Last Theorem is, and this is looking
for a counterexample to for bonds last theorem. It's never going to find that. So this program which
ignores its own input. So on the empty string, it, it never halts it
in, hold on anyone. But if this were P, then Q P would have this program encoded into it as like a
subroutine it can call. And what QP will do on input Y, we'll just ignore why
doesn't pay any attention. It'll call FLM on the empty string. And if that ever halts, which it turns out it
doesn't in this example, then it will return 42. Alright, and so we get
P on the empty string, halts if and only if there's
a y that makes Q output 42. But this condition right here, Q does the same thing no
matter what its input is. So whether there's a y that
makes Q output 40 to it, if any, why doesn't
all of them do it? But if FLM doesn't hold
on the empty string, then no, I can make you up with. So we actually get a stronger
condition than we really need.-e 

en-ECS 220 6b_7.2-3 computable enumerability.txt

So I want to draw another analogy to the intuition we built
up with the class NP. And this is this notion of
having a verifiable proof. That's what it meant for
a problem to be in NP, is that for Al yes instances, there's a short efficiently
verifiable proof that it is in fact a yes instance. So we can actually make a
similar characterization between the decidable problems and these so-called computable and
innumerable problems, which may not be decidable, but, but they are sort of verifiable. So note that the halting, um, which is we want to know
oninput x, does P halt? Well, if the answer is yes, there's a finite proof
of that fact, right? There's a few ways you
can formalize this, but one way would be just give
the number of steps it needs, say, on a Turing machine. So p halts on input x if and only if there
exists a natural number t, such that P run on
input x for t steps. But this predicate, does P halt
an input x in t steps or not? That's decidable. You can just
run p for that many steps. And if it doesn't hold after
that many steps, you can say no. That might not be the
right answer to this, but you are verifying that he
doesn't call in that amount of time. But there's a relationship
between these two. This existential operator here, p halts an input x if
and only if there is a finite time bound and
how long it takes to hold. So this halts and time problem
is decidable right here. I'm kind of expressing it
like it's the algorithm. But, you know, there, there is an algorithm to answer this question. In other words, there's a,
a so-called total program and a program that
halts on all inputs. That's a verifier for halt in. And for it to verify
the program halts, you have to give it a proof. And the proof is how many
steps it's going to take. And you don't give the right number, it won't be able to verify it. So any decision problem with
this property is called computability innumerable
or CE for short. And the set of computable
innumerable problems is called capital C. And this relationship between the decidable and the computable,
innumerable problems. It's analogous to P versus NP. These you can just decide, you can give a yes or
no answer to any input. These if it's a yes
instance, There's approved, that can be verified and finite time, maybe a huge amount
of time, but finite. And these are the versions of that when you put a polynomial
time constraint on a tripod. All right, so there's
no time-bound on is, there's another name for this
called recursively enumerable or R E that you might see
out there and other papers. This is kind of an older term, but some people still use it. And just like with NP versus co-NP, if there's a no instance, like if p does not
call it an input x, there's no obvious finite
proof of that fact. But the compliment of the halting problem that
asking the question, does P failed to halt? Well, no instances of that. Ones that also they
have proofs, right? So we have this notion
of being able to give a proof of a no instance. And that's cozy problems. Okay, So hopefully the somewhat
makes sense by analogy. Other than the title,
computable enumerable. What is enumerable mean here? So there's an alternate
characterization of this. This is like the verifier
characterization. There's an alternate
characterization using something called an enumerator that really
looks like what it sounds like. So imagine a program P. We call it an enumerator and it
takes no input, right? Or if you give it an input, it just ignores its input. And it runs for right, that they actually
intended to run forever. And occasionally it prints a number. Okay, I've usually said the inputs, I imagine all programs tank are
at their core binary strings. Just for the sake of this slide, it's going to be easier to
imagine them as numbers, right? Maybe I'm writing down the
binary expansion of the number. But it's to make for easier code
to imagine these are integers. So the set of all printed
numbers we call printed of P. So P runs forever. Once in a while it prints a number. Maybe it prints sum with repetitions, but there's some set of
all the numbers that ever prints and that's printed it be, could be the empty set, could
be all the natural numbers. Okay, so let's let L be a subset of and now I'm going to
consider this to be a language because there's a
bijection between N and 01 star. So we're going to show that L is CE, meaning there is this total
program V, the verifier, that lx is true if and
only if there is a witness w that makes V XW say true, right? So this is basically looks at all again be where does not requiring vid have any time-bound or there
to be any length band on w. So we're going to show LLC by the definition on the previous slide, if and only if it is
exactly the set of numbers printed by some program
P. So pause and think, how would you do the
forward direction? So here is a program that would do in the forward direction would
be we have an enumerator P. And we want to know just a sec. Sorry, I wanted to change the
term narrative enumerator. So we have some the numerator P. So it prints some set
of numbers, integers. We want to show that the set is C. In other words, we want to show
there's a total program vi that can verify if given the
proper proof we call a witness w. The bat number really
is printed by two. So here's I will define the, it takes x and w.
And it wants to know is x one of the numbers
that's ever printed by b? Alright, we want to
know that. So how would we allow somebody to furnish
us a proof of this fact? We run it, it prints some numbers. The proof could be the order
in which x gets printed. So they ought to give us a W That's equal to the order
in which it's printed. And so now we don't have to wait
forever to see if it's printed. We just have to run it long enough. W, different numbers get printed. So we start i at 0, and for each y that's printed
by P, we increment i. We just go and go and go and
go until I gets up to W. And at that point, we, why was the number just
print that we see? Is that equal to x? If so, good at x really is the W
with number to get printed. So we return true in that case. Otherwise we return false, right? Again, it doesn't mean in that case, x is never printed by P. It just was not the WIth number printed by p. So w was not an adequate
proof that it's printed. And then we need this
thing to be total. We want this to hold on
all possible inputs. So, so if this wasn't true, mean on the next
iteration when it gets up above W will just
immediately return false. Okay, sorry about that. I keep
noticing things wrong with this slide and we don't have to
check if I is bigger than w. Just once i gets to w will
immediately return, right? If x is not, y will return false. So that's the forward direction. So this gives us a verifier
that x is printed by P. As long as the proof we furnish it is the right order
in which x is print. So now how can we go
the other direction? So pause and think about that
for yourself on your own. Okay, we have to give
an enumerator, right? Which is a program
that takes no inputs. And it should print all the x's that can cause V to return true somehow by
giving the right w, Right? So maybe this V, but
just we have some v, There's some total program, it halts on every pair
of inputs, you get it. We want to know what are
all the first inputs we could give it that
could somehow cause it to return true as long as they gave it the right input for
the second input, right? As long as there exists, that
would make it return true on XW. So we can try this. Let's just enumerate
over all the x's, right? And we're, we're just going
to look for the ones that have a W that make V XW return true. So, well an Uber, I don't know the axis
for the first x, we'll set W to 0, right?
And then what do we do? Well, we ask is V XW
true if not increment W? And just keep going until we
find the w that makes it true. And then we print that x. Do
you see what's wrong with this? Well, imagine we get to an
X where the answer is no. In other words, no for that x, that maybe x equals 1, there's no w where v of
1 w would return true. This will just be an infinite loop, but that's not what we want. If T2 is something that we could return true and we want to get there and we want to print it, but we'll be stuck on one forever looking for a witness for
it that doesn't exist. So this is no good.
That doesn't work. So to make this work, we need to, we're going to use a
trick, It's called dovetailing. And kind of key idea here
was that we tried to like settle the case for x equals 1 before we even thought
about x equals 2. But if the case for x equals one is false, we're never
going to find the W. So we can't do all the computation
we ever need to do for x one before moving on to x equals 2? Because we're going to
have to do an infinite amount of computation there. So the key here is
going to be to splice in computation for all the x's so that the ones that can be verified with a
finite amount of work, eventually they get an arbitrary
amount of work put towards them. Because that sounds a bit abstract. Here's a concrete implementation. We can iterate over all possible t. And this is an infinite loop, right? This, this will run forever
in a T would go up forever. But notice what's
happening air inside. It's got two bounded loops. Unlike this while loop over here, these are two bounded for loops. They start at 0, go up to t, they stop there, and
they call v.floors. And v.events always halts, is total. So this thing will do an infinite number of
iterations of the outer loop. Okay, what does it
do? Well, it's just checking every possible pair
x and w between 0 and t. And if it finds one that makes
be true, it prints that x. But notice T keeps getting
bigger and bigger and bigger. So for any possible pair
X and W, you can have, once T is bigger than both of them, we will find that x and w
and we will print that X. But we won't print and
a dx is they can't make V true because this has to
be true to pass down here.-e 

en-ECS 220 6c_7.2-1 arithmetical hierarchy.txt

So we saw that the halting
problem is computable, enumerable, but it's not decidable. So a corollary of this
is that the set of decidable languages
is a proper subset of the set of computable
enumerable languages. And unlike P versus NP
here we know it's proper. We can actually
exhibit a language and that's CE, but not decidable. And the complement of any decidable
language is decidable, right? You can just tab, flip true answers to false and
false answers to true and that, that decides the complement. But one thing that
we're going to stay. So the second part is not
quite a corollary of this, but we'll state is that c
is not equal to cosine, but deck is equal to codec. So deck is a proper subset of the coping beautifully enumerable languages and these two are not eat. So here's an exercise to do, or we can talk through it
in the lecture if you want. But here's an exercise to
think about on your own. And it's a good exercise
to do to kind of solidify understanding of these two. Which is that a language is
decidable if and only if both is and its complement are
computable, innumerable. Or in other words, it's decidable
if it's C and it's also Cosi, mean and its compliment of C. So, huh? Okay, so we can generalize this
idea just like we put p at the bottom of the
polynomial hierarchy and these alternating quantifiers
kinda went above it. Well, the first definition of CE we saw had this exists quantifier. So we can define sigma 0 and pi 0 to just be the
decidable languages. Sigma one is c and pi one is cozy, kind of like sigma one and sigma
and pi P1 for AND, and OMP. And then we can define
this hierarchy above them. So that this is basically the same thing as the
definition of the sigma p k. That language isn't sigma k. If there's a language one level
low on the opposite side, the co language and pi k minus one, so that you can express the
predicate a of x as being true if and only if there exists
a W that makes b of x w true. So in other words, but
the math is expressible by for all the predicate going
down to the sigma k minus 2 level. So it's essentially saying, hey, x is true of there exists
one string such that for all of another string there exists another strain,
et cetera, et cetera. And then at the bottom you
have a decidable predicate. And we just define pi
k to because sigma k. So we're kinda zipping through this. We're not going to
spend a lot of time on this so-called arithmetical
hierarchy I just wanted to emphasize is define the exact same way as the
polynomial hierarchy, but without the polynomial
time constraint. And unlike the polynomial hierarchy, we know this one is proper. Sigma k is a proper
subset of sigma k plus 1. So when I, like I said, we're not gonna spend
a ton of time on it, but just to make some
of this abstract, this a little more concrete. Here's an example from
the second level, right? And it's provably at the second
level and not any lower. And it's the, the
problem given a program. Is it total, meaning, does it halts on every input? So we're not going to prove
that it's that it's not C, but it turns out if not,
let's just observe, okay, why is it in pi to pi, two predicates are
going to be the ones expressible with a for all exists. And then a decidable predicate. P is a total program. If what's true? Well, if for all strings
x, you might give to B, there exists a time-bound
t such that if you run p on input x and halts in
at most t steps, right? And notice this
predicate is decidable. If you're given p and x and t, you can certainly run p on input x for t steps and
see if it all right, so that is perfectly well decidable. And this predicate
is expressible as a for all and then an
exists and then this. But notice, unlike in NP or
the polynomial hierarchy, these are, if you think of
these as like searches, these are unbounded searches. There's no limit on how big x
can be or how big T can be. You need that for every
single string x there is, there are infinitely many. If there's any t, no matter how huge, that makes this true, then P is total. So that shows the total is n pi to, it takes a little more
work to show that it's not in sigma 1 or pipeline
that that is also true.-e 

en-ECS 220 6c_7.2-2 From undecidable problems to unprovable truths.txt

So let's step back a bit
from the sort of MCI details of the arithmetical hierarchy and these various definitions
of undecidability. And get at. Why were these people
sort of thinking along these lines when all this stuff was invented back in the 30s Anyway, while they were trying
to get at, you know, Hilbert's dream of automating
mathematical reasoning. So in order to talk
sensibly about that, you need a formal
way of talking about mathematical reasoning and proofs
and theorems and so forth. So we've talked a bit about
this in a previous chapter. We're going to get slightly
more technical here, but still not to the level of
technicality class on logic. So we'll say a formal system
consists of a couple of things, a finite set of axioms. So these are like statements we just assume are true without proof. We saw those nine
axioms of set theory. Those are statements about sets
and what rules they have to obey. And then it includes some
rules of inference, right? So this is something you might
have learned a long time ago in a very boring dry math class that there's something
called modus ponens. So very, very simple rules of inference at the level of
detail we tend not to talk about when we write down
our proofs like if a is true and the statement
a implies b is true, then that implies that B is true, right? That's modus ponens. So there's a few other rules of inference and they're
all like this symbol. And a theorem is a statement that is provable by applying the rules
of inference to the axioms. And technically you
may not believe it, but just those nine axioms
that we wrote down. If you apply these simple rules
to those axioms in the right way, you can get all the
mathematical theorems that I've ever been proven. So this isn't how we think about it when we're
actually writing those proofs. But it is possible to say that
you don't approve of it there. And it's just applying these rules, starting with axioms until you finally have resulted
in the state megawatt. So this is how we're
going to formalize, how we talk about
mathematical reasoning. And formal systems
are, or how we do it. Now, formal systems
aren't all good, right? So we know a couple of
properties to be true of them. One is that the formal system
should be consistent and consistent means that no
contradiction can be proven. And the way we formalize that
is that for each statement t, at most one of t or the negation
of t is provable, right? So when you get a contradiction,
what does it mean? It means you can prove both a
statement and its negation. And what that means is your
formal system is no good for resolving which
statements are true. Because if you can prove goal, it doesn't tell you which one
of them might actually be true. So it's actually no good. So this is something
that we want to require a formal system in order for it
to actually be helpful to us. But it's not the only
thing that we want. We also would like for
it to be complete, meaning that all statements
actually can be resolved by proof. We can formalize that as
for each statement III, at least one of t are not. T is provable. If neither was provable, then, okay, we don't get a contradiction. Neither does it help us figure
out whether to use true. So these are two properties
we would want to be true, the formal system that we use to help us discover mathematical facts. And if it violated
either one of these, it would not help us with regard to the statements where
it was in violation. So what we would like as a formal system that's both
consistent and complete. So for each statement t, exactly
one of t are not, T is provable. So a consistent and
complete formal system would fulfill Hilbert's dream, right? All mathematical truth
can be discovered simply by exploring the proofs that
are possible in the system. And they can approve
fear would not be like the kind of thing you're
doing for your homework. A proof would be just a finite string that's encoding what order to apply rules of inference starting from the axioms in order to get
your gear their statement. So it's just a systematic
exploration of strings that encode
rules of inference. That the statement on
the end of that string is the theorem that's been proven. So you could just iterate
over all possible proofs. You know, looking for either a
proof of t or proof of not T. If the system is
consistent and complete, you will be guaranteed
to find one of them. And I say you, I mean
an algorithm here. This would be the algorithm that can automate
mathematical reasoning input t. It would search for a proof of t and in parallel would
search for a proof of not T. And one of them, it would find and it would tell
you whether T was true or false. Now, there's a little
technicality here. Technically, we would
have had to require one more thing called
soundness, right? So we say a formal system is sound if all the statements you
can prove are actually true. This is a little bit murky. If you haven't seen a logic before, it kind of sounds like I'm just using synonyms here as though
they're not synonyms. So it is technically possible
for you to write down formal systems that are
consistent but unsound, right? Like maybe everything
they prove is halts. So again, this would be
kind of a useless system, something that we never
prove a contradiction, but it doesn't prove anything true. However, they, you know, if
everything approved was false, you could just negate
it to get the answer. But this, this is the kind of
system that logicians were reasoning about to try to figure out the answer to Hilbert's question.-e 

en-ECS 220 6c_7.2-3 Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem (soundness).txt

So here is the theorem that
made Kurt Godel famous PA and shocked the world and certainly shocked
and devastated Hilbert. Hey, he more or less just
shut down Hilbert's idea. Not totally actually terrain. That was the one who kind
of sealed the coffin, but he showed that there is no formal system that's both
complete and consistent, right? There's no way to define a system of mathematics where
every true statement, like everything we'd
want to discover, we can actually find a proof of it. And we can't prove
anything that's on this. So if a state, if a system is powerful enough to actually prove all this
stuff that's true, then it's got a contradiction
lurking in it somewhere. And there's another theorem
that says technically if you can prove a contradiction,
you can prove anything. And so your systems totally useless like every statement
you can write down, including its negation
could be proven, so it would be no good. Okay, So how did Godel
proved as well at an intuitive level and you read popular articles about
Godel's theorem. This is kinda how they express it. He showed that any sufficiently
expressive formal system can be used to express a
self-referential statement. And the statement
looks kinda like this. It's, this statement
cannot be proved, right, like this one right here. So, all right, so what
are we to make of a statement whose
only goal is to refer to itself and say,
I cannot be proved. Well, if it's false, then it can be proved, right? If this statement is false, then it's the case that this
statement can be proved. But that means the system is
not consistent because it now asserts that the statement
cannot be proved, but you also can prove
that it can be proved. Now, if it's true, then it can't be proved, right? That's what it says. But then the system is not complete. Here's a statement that's true, but it's not provable. So more or less all the work went into shine at any sufficiently
expressive formal system, you can do something like this, but we haven't really dug into the weeds of what exactly
is a formal system. So as currently stated, why I'm putting quotes around stuff, not really formally defining what
is a formal mathematical system. These are just tricks
of language, right? I can say stuff like
this, but, you know, it's not that meaningful because I haven't really said what a proof is. I haven't really said
what a statement is. So it's kinda like
this cartoon, right? So it's just a check
of language so we can actually give a more formal proof of Godel's Incompleteness Theorem. And we don't have to go this route. We don't have to do girdles. The original proof Can lot
rely on our intuition. That comes from knowing that the
halting problem is not decidable. So the way we're going to get a statement that's
true but not provable. Is that because the halting
problem is undecidable, there's going to be
statements of the form a certain program P on a certain
input x that does not hold. There will be true, but
they won't be provable. So how do we do this? So suppose for the sake of
contradiction that you've got a formal system and it violates
Godel's Incompleteness Theorem. It's express. Now he said sufficiently
expressive for our purposes. That'll mean, you know, the kinds of statements
we've been making about programs and algorithms
and Turing machines. The systems powerful enough
to make those statements. So you can define all the
things you'd need to define, say to talk about Turing machines. What do you need to
define a Turing machine? Well, it's, you know, if you remember your
undergrad theory course, it's a seven tuple. That seven tuple has
finite sets in it, it as subsets of transition rules. So it's, you know, it's
just basic kind of discrete that you need to
talk about Turing machines. So you need your formal
system to be powerful enough to write down statements like
that and reason about them. It all. And we're also supposing it's
complete and consistent. So what does that mean
for every statement t? Either it's it worth
negation is provable, end. Either one of them is not provable. So exactly one of
these two is frugal. So we're going to show this existed, then we could solve
the halting problem, which we showed cannot be them. So if you have a formal system like this that's powerful enough to talk
about program behavior. Then to solve the halting problem, do is given p and x, we're going to execute
two searches in parallel. One, we're going to search for
a proof that P of X false. And two in parallel, we're going to search for a
proof that P of x does not hold. So whether it halts are not
exactly one of these has a proof. So completeness and consistency imply that the true one is provable. Except now I do have to get
into a bit of a technicality. It's this distinction between
provability in truth. Again, this could be one of
those weird formal systems that can prove false things, but it's consistent because it
can't prove their negation. So technically this
is a weaker thing. Then got to actually prove Like a week incompleteness
theorem that the soundness version of
Godel's Incompleteness Theorem. So a sound system is one that
it's even stronger than saying, you can't prove a contradiction. It's also saying, well, whichever one of the two you can
prove is actually the true one. So you don't somehow screw up and end up proving all the false statements. So it's a stronger
condition to assume. And if this virtue of the system, then this would be a solution to, this would be an algorithm
for the halting problem. But, you know, one. The halting problem is undecidable. So there is no such system, or we could use it to
solve the halting problem. So, so what this means is
that no system expressive enough to reason about programs and computation is both
complete and sound. Now, if you want to know the proof of the full Incompleteness
Theorem, we'll do that next. And if you want to see
more details about it, you can go to this blog
post of Scott Aronson, where he gets into details about the distinction
between these two concepts.-e 

en-ECS 220 6c_7.2-4 Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem (consistency).txt

So this next part
gets a bit technical. You want to see the
details where I got this. It's from this blog
post and Scott Aronson, I've not in the textbook. But if you want to see
the full modern day based on computation proof of Godel's
Incompleteness Theorem. Here's a way to do it. And we do it by making up a new problem called
consistent guessing. So this is not a decision problem. This is a more general thing. An algorithm solves. Consistent guessing if
it can do the following, it takes as input a program. And it's not quite the
epsilon halting problem. We require something a
little more stringent, which is that if it does hall, we actually want to be able to get the right answer, accept or reject. So what we need to
do is to say, well, if P on the empty string accepts, our algorithm should accept P. If
P on the empty string rejects, our algorithm should reject P. And if P and the empty
string runs forever, then our algorithm has
to give an answer. It doesn't matter what it is. It
could be either accept or reject, but it has to halt, right? So we didn't require this. We allowed it to run forever. In this case, it could just run p on the empty string and do what it does, meaning to accept or reject.
But we're saying not enough. If p does not halt on the empty string to say you've
solved consistent guessing, you need to give some answer
after some finite amount of time. And if P on the empty string does
actually hold and get an answer, you have to give the right answer. So this problem is uncomfortable. There's no algorithm that can
solve this problem and that can be proved using diagonalization similar to the original halting problem, but we won't do that here. So with consistent guessing
in mind and unbind, beautiful, Here's a modern day
proof of Godel's Incompleteness. There are fixed from the previous one that only
referred to soundness. So if P on the empty string accepts, then what we're gonna do is
exploit the sort of asymmetry between a program of halting and not halting a statement of the form. A program accepts an input or
a program halts on an input. If that's true, there's always
a proof of that, right? There are some mathematical
statements that don't have a proof, but this is the kind that does write a transcript of the steps
of the computation, for example, is a proof that
that that program accepts. So if, so, if the following
statement accepts p Epsilon is true. So this is the statement that
asserts P accepts the input epsilon. If this is true, then it's provable. And that similarly olds
for rejects be epsilon. If that is true, that
P rejects Epsilon, There's a proof of that fact. So this is a little bit
stronger statement then we can make about arbitrary
mathematical statements. So now we suppose for the
sake of contradiction that our formal system violates
Godel's Incompleteness Theorem. It's expressive enough to reason
about programs and computation. It's complete and consistent
meaning for every statement t, exactly one of t or its
negation is brutal. So here's how we use
that fact to solve the consistent guessing problem
and get a contradiction. So we're defining a program, see here that takes as
input a program pizza. I'm going to solve
consistent guessing. So how does P solve it? It has two searches
in parallel for that searches for a proof that P
accepts the empty string. And it also searches
for a proof that P does not accept the
empty string, right? Notice I didn't say reject air. I just said search for prove
that it does not accept. Now there's an asymmetry here, right? So and if it finds
this proof, it says, except, if it finds this
proof it says reject. So now here's the key difference with the original prove consistency and this star statement and the air
implies that p Epsilon rejects. There's no proof of one to be found. Right? But now, completeness and consistency give us that there
is a proof of tip, right? One of these has to be provable, so there's no proof of this. There is a proof of this. So C will reject as it needs to. And the second case, well,
if P of epsilon accepts, right, then there is no
proof of number two, right? And by completeness there
is a proof of number one. And so we will find that
and we will accept. So it may be neither. These is provable in that case. Went away. Forget I said that. So, all right, So if p on input epsilon accepts
than SEA accepts the panel, epsilon rejects than C rejects. And so c solve consistent guess it. So why is this all
consistent guessing? Well, because it
always halt note it's searching for a proof
of this statement or its negation and completeness and consistency give you one
of them will be found. In this kind of reasoning tells
you that it'll actually be the correct answer when
it gives an answer. So one of the searches will
succeed, It'll be correct. And this contradicts
the young computability of consistent guessing. So we get Godel's
Incompleteness Theorem. No system expressive
enough to reason about programs is both
consistent and complete.-e 

