en-ECS 220 8a_8.1-1 space versus time, and read-only, write-only, and read-write memory.txt

Next chapter that's
called memory paths in games is really about
memory or space complexity. But the idea of paths in graphs and two player games play such a central role that
it made it into the title. So we've been talking about
time complexity so far. And now we're going to talk
about space complexity. So what's the difference when
we think about these two? So we'll define a
little more formally, some complexity classes later. But right now informally, let's just say space is
the class of problems decidable with a polynomial
amount of memory. You know, same as with time. We measure the memory usage as a function of the number
of bits of input. And now the space usage has
the same units as the input. That's just number of bits used. Okay, so it's often said
the difference between time and space is that
you can reuse space, but you can't reuse time. Now this leads to some
unintuitive results. So first of all, unlike what we believed to be the case
with time complexity, we know in space complexity, non-determinism does not help that much only by maybe a polynomial, a factor with space
bounded computation. So P space is known to equal the nondeterministic
version of p space. And we also have that n space
of S equals colon space of S. In other words, if a language is decidable with a certain
amount of space, then so is its complement. Which again, is weird because it means proving that
something doesn't exist. It's just as easy as proving
that it does exist if you recall this difference
between what NP and co-NP. But some intuition still hold. So with more space, you can compute more. There's a space hierarchy
theorem that says, you know, you can compute more in
space AS than you can in space. Little of it as if time is bounded, space is also bounded. So whatever you can
compute with time t, You can also compute
with that much space. And if space is bounded, time is also bounded, but here they're not
the same background. Whatever you can do with space S, you can do with time, exponential ns. But we, you know, we
think maybe you do need more time than you need space. On the biggest open question here is, does space helped more than time? Or more formally,
does p equal P space? And we think the answer is no. And proving this is true that they're
unequal should be even easier than proving P
is not equal to NP. As we'll see in a bit, we
see the relationships. Okay? So how do we define space bounded
computation more formally? So the textbook, as
I've said and takes a somewhat informal approach
to some of these definitions. If we do think about terrain
machines, specifically, sub-linear time computation
is mostly uninteresting. For a Turing machine, two. Scan a bit of its input
that's near the end. It needs time linear in
the size of the input. Even if it doesn't care about
the bits in the middle, it takes time o of n Just
to advance the tape head. So sub-linear time computation generally doesn't make
a whole lot of sense. Now it is somewhat interesting
for random access machines that can jump immediately to some part of the input without reading
all the parts in between. So binary search is a logarithmic
time and computation, but only on a RAM machine. It doesn't make sense to
do it on a terrain should. Now sublinear space computation makes sense even on a Turing machine. So for example, you might
want to search the graph of all web pages on the internet. In fact, not just you might, many companies do want
to do this very thing. Google tries to do it continuously. And of course, you can't load
the whole input into memory. So it makes sense to think
about using an amount of space less than the total input
you're trying to process. Now the way we formalize
this with our formal models as we give our Turing machine
or a random access machine, whatever kind of model we're using. A read only input, but a read write
working memory, right? So for a Turing machine, these
would be two separate tapes, and only the latter is
counted as space usage. So the idea here is
to be able to talk about space being sub-linear. You need to restrict the
model so it can't write to the input and use it
for some of its space. Otherwise, that would, that should
count against that space usage. But you do want to let it read
any of the input at once. Just the working storage
is going to be small. And if we're talking
about Boolean output, we can be done there. Sometimes we want to talk about writing more output than
the allowed space usage. So for example, you know, if you want to talk about
arithmetic operations like multiplication being
done in sublinear space. Well, they write numbers just
as big as the ones they read. So To talk sensibly about not using very much space to do that
well yet to write the output, you can't make it read-only. So you make a write-only. Alright, so you can't read them or you can't write to the
input that you can read it. You can't read your output that you've written, that
you can write to it. So the input and output
are no use to you if you try to use them as
intermediate storage. And then you only count the space
used on your read write memory. Now the textbook sort of implicitly assumes RAM Random Access Memory. So essentially what this means is if you're given a
location like an address, an integer address into your memory, you can think of it like which position is it on
a Turing machine tape? Or you can just think about it
like a regular computer substance that has a linear memory, just like a Turing machine, you address it with a single integer. And once you're given
this memory location, once you've written it down, if you then try to read or write it, you assume that takes
one single step. Right now, note that only matters
if we also care about the time. And notice the size of your input
or your working memory is K. It's going to take log of k bits
to write an address into it.-e 

en-ECS 220 8a_8.1-2 space-bounded complexity classes L and PSPACE.txt

So with that definition
of space usage in mind, let's define our major space
bounded complexity classes. So space of S sub N is the space
counterpart of time of T of n. The class of problems solvable with Big-O of acid and
working memory, right? And we use this Big-O to
kind of brush aside or okay, Are we talking how many bits of memory or how many bytes of memory? You know, what exactly
is the tape alphabet if it's a Turing machine, the answer to those questions
doesn't matter if all you're concerned about is getting things within a
multiplicative constant. So we use a big, Oh, they're just like with time. And then the two major complexity classes we'll
focus on here that, that capture a class of
space bounds as we put here, is one is just called an L, and this is space of log of n. This is a confusing name. Every other space plasma use has the word space
somewhere in the title, except the ones related to L, where instead of saying
L space, it just says L. And I don't know why this is. It might be because logarithmic time doesn't make a lot of sense
on a Turing machines. So there's no need to have
separate l time and space classes. But at any rate, when you see L, it means space log of n, meaning O of log of n
space, not log squared. You don't allow exponent's here, just O of log of n, So login to login and
three login, etc. So intuitively, what is this class? Well, these are problems
where you can solve them and the only extra memory you need is to have a constant number of
pointers into your input. Like each pointer is going to
take log of n space to write down to address a certain location
and your input and read it. And this is, these are the problems, or you only need a constant
number of such points. So for example, if you're
processing a graph, you might want to search
the graph or do something. The problems, or you need
only o to store o of 1 nodes at a time and nothing else that these would
be logging space. And then of course there's
polynomial space because polynomial bounds again
are quite robust, been closed under
composition and everything. So this is the space
bounded counterpart of p. So let's see some examples of log-space and polynomial
space computation. So here's an example
somethin showing that logarithmic space isn't
that much of a restriction. They can do things say, finite state machines can't do. So it helps to have more than constant memory deciding
palindrome, right? So remember a palindrome is a string and that's equal to its own reverse, looks the same forward and backward. So here is some pseudocode for it. Or actually I guess this
is my duty Python code. So how can we tell if x
equals its own reverse? Well, we can set a pointer
I to the start of x, a pointer j to the end of X, and then move them towards
each other while I'm, while I is less than J, check XI and XJ if they're unequal. Oh, there's two spots that we want to know that the
first symbol equals the last, the second symbol equals
the second to last. The third symbol equals
the third to last. So we check those if you find
that unequal, return false, otherwise they move i up and J
down, and we get to the end. We didn't find a pair of
unequal ones, then we say true. So what's the space complexity? Well, we need log n bits
to store I starts at one, but it goes all the
way up to n If n is the length of x and when
he login bits for j. So we need a constant number
of pointers into art input I and j are both pointers and then
we can read them like this. Alright, so there's a logarithmic
space computable example. Here's a polynomial space example. Recall the definition
of cellular atomaton. When I drew them earlier, I drew time going down. Now time is going to the right. So a configuration would
be one column here. This would be at time 0,
at time 1, at time 2. This shows how this one-dimensional
cellular automaton evolves, starting at time 0,
going up to time and 63. And one thing you might
want to do is check if a given configuration is in a periodic orbit of a
cellular automaton. So you'll notice this
configuration repeats. So right in a counter-example would be one where it
eventually gets into an orbit, but that configuration happened
prior to the orbit, right? So for instance, if you
started here and then repeated this configuration and
then cycled within a year, none of these would be in the period. So here's a way to do it. In polynomial space. We have our cellular atomaton rule that CA and then our initial
configuration and knit, which is just some binary string and is going to be
the length of that. Now, of course, our total input
size would also include the rules, but we assume those are
constant size and we have a very big configuration. So we start exit the
initial configuration. We're going to repeatedly
update it by applying the rule. This is just some code for
applying the CA rules. So this is, I won't walk through
all of this to carefully, but we update it and then we just check is x equal to a net, right? So we're going to repeatedly
updated if we ever revisit and it was
an aperiodic orbit. Okay, So why does this need
only polynomial space? Well, at any given time, we're remembering in it, which takes space and an
x which takes space n. So that's two n plus this, you know, the space usage or update
year, but what does that do? Well, it just reads
three bits out of x. It uses AI to index into there, but that's only log of n bits. That's negligible compared
to the n bits to store x. And then, yeah, not too
much extra space here. So this is polynomial space, linear space it back. So the net x, y, and j are n-bits
H and an iss log evidence.-e 

en-ECS 220 8a_8.1-3 relationship of time and space-bounded complexity classes.txt

Let's think a bit
now about time-bound versus space balance and how do these two inner
play in one computation? So first, an assumption of any reasonable model
we're going to make here is certainly true
of Turing machines, is that a program can allocate at most a constant number of
bits per time-step, right? So now sometimes you'll
have a single line of code like malloc that will appear to allocate whole bunch
of memory at once. But that's only gives you not see the operating system code
executing the dig down into it. On average, it, it might have to clear out that space for you to do. And if it's clearing out n bits
for you to use, then it's, it's going to require
O of n time to do that with this kind of more
straightforward with a Turing machine or what does
it mean to allocate memory? It just means you move your
tape head further right, than you've ever moved it before, but that only gets you
one more tape cell. So so with the definition of space
just be number of tape cells, it's clear that you
can't use more space on a Turing machine and then you have time available to move the tape. But we're just going
to assume that this is true of any of our models. And so that means whatever
is your space bound, it's gotta be less than your
time-bound, but within a constant. So stated in the set
theoretic notation, time of T is a subset of space of t. In other words, if you can
solve a problem in o of t time, you can also solve IT and OT space, just because that algorithm can't be used in more than OT
space when it runs. So in particular, P is
a subset of P space. Now, let's go the other way. Can we go from knowing how much space a computation uses to putting a
bound on how much time it uses. Well, if it uses all of
us and bits of memory, all right, So SME space, then it has at most two to the 0
of S and possible configurations that it could visit to
what the configuration. Well, again, this is where
Turing machines come in handy. Most of the, the bulk of counting how big that configuration
is is the tape content. You need to know what
state the Turing machine is where the tape that, but it's mostly in that string. That's the take content. And what's the length of that string? Well, the biggest it
gets is the space usage. That's the definition
of the space usage. So how many strings of
length 0 lesson can you add? Well, it's like, like
two to the 0 of S. And now you might
have a different base here than two if it's a
bigger tape alphabet, but again, the big O up here
would, would take care of that. So, okay, So it has at most exponentially more
configurations than ESA, them that I can run through. Now, imagine that ever repeats a configuration will
then it'll run forever. But in this chapter we're only
going to be focusing on deciders, on total programs that
halt and all their inputs. So conversely, if a program
halts on all its inputs, it can never repeat a configuration
or else it would run forever. So it must have at
most two to the o of n steps that it takes to the time is at most
exponential in the space. So we get this for general space
bounded complexity classes. Space of S, meaning using o of s in beds is contained in time
of two to though of S. In other words, if you can
solve a problem with OS space, you can solve it with
two to the o of n time. So in particular, that means
l is a subset of B space. Problem solvable with
logarithmic space necessarily take only polynomial time to
avoid repeating configurations. And similarly, any
polynomial space bounded computation is naturally going
to use at most exponential time. So that's time versus space. In the deterministic setting. We can think about
nondeterministic time as well, studied a lot and compare
that to deterministic space. So recall that n time of T is
contained in time of two to the 0 t. For example, NP is contained in x. This was our observation that you can solve problems in NP by exhaustive search all
the possible witnesses. That's the basis of
this kind of result. You to search over all
the possible witnesses using the verifier characterization or nondeterministic bets using the non-deterministic
computation variant. So here is that algorithm
and we analyze this. We showed it takes at
most two to the 0 t time. So let's take the same algorithm
and analyze its space complexity. So the length of the witness that your w that
you're passing into the verifier here is at most the amount of time
that the verifier uses, right? If it's actually
nontrivial to using its, its witness, then it's going
to run for a length of time, at least that so the witness length can't be too much bigger than T or I can't be any bigger than T and N.
And the space usage of the can't be any bigger than its time by the
same argument we gave before, which is that to allocate new memory, you need time, so you can't use
more space than you're using time. So putting those two together, we actually have that. If you can do something in non-deterministic time
t, naturally, you can. By applying this algorithm, this algorithm can
solve it in space OFT. So going to polynomial time, we get the NP is contained
in T space, right? Just this algorithm naturally
uses at most polynomial space. So putting all those together, these various complexity
class that we've looked at, we have whatever you can
do in logarithmic space, you can do in polynomial time. And if you can do that
deterministically, you can do it non-deterministically
in polynomial time. And if you can do that,
right, or in other words, you can verify in polynomial time. And and if you can verify
in polynomial time, you can search all the
possible witnesses and only polynomial space. And that naturally takes at most exponential time to avoid
repeating a configuration. If you can do that deterministically, you can do it non-deterministically
and, and so on. And that takes at most
exponential space. So we have these containment, some of them were not sure
whether their proper or not, but scanning farther out, we do know that getting from
P to X is a proper container. The time hierarchy
theorem says there's things solvable in exponential time, but not polynomial time. We also have a non-deterministic
variant of that. So getting from NP to NXP, you have to add some new problems. That's the non-deterministic
time hierarchy there. Now we won't prove it, but there
is a space hierarchy theorem. And even for Turing machines,
holds quite tightly. Where if S1 is little o of
s To write by any amount, then you can solve more
problems of space S2, s1, which means we can come
back up here and say L and P space and exponential space, three space classes up here are
each properly contained in Linux.-e 

en-ECS 220 8a_8.2 NL and NPSPACE nondeterministic space-bounded computation and prover-verifier characterization.txt

We're going to talk
about how to define non-deterministic space
bounded computation. Now the textbook goes through some prover verifier
formulations similar to the verification characterization
of NP that we talked about. Now, the key difference with nb is that even if
you're using only say, polynomial space or particularly,
especially log-space. But even with polynomial space, witnesses can be exponential length. For example, a common P
space type of problem would be finding a
check made in chess, or more generally, a
winning move in some game. And those could be
exponential length compared to the number of bits you need to represent one single
configuration of the game. So we don't have the polynomial space found on witness length anymore. Now, I think it's a bit
awkward actually to define non-deterministic
space that way. So I actually prefer the
non-deterministic program formulation, even though I don't
prefer it for time, For today's gone, I find
this easier to think about. So remember just the definition of a non-deterministic Turing
machine or algorithm, it can generate
non-deterministic bets, right? And we say that if the
correct answer is yes, we demand that some
computation path except for some choice of non-determinism
should cause it to accept. And if the correct answer is no, the no computation, pasture, etc. That's exactly as
we've been doing it. Now we just put an S
of n space bound on it and we get the class n space of S. So that's fairly straightforward compared to the other
kind of characterization. So we can define n, l is n space log n and n space is all the n polynomial
n spaces particular. So I prefer to think
about it that way, but there is approver verifier characterization similar
to NP hour or more generally, n time with t. So in this case
we have a verifier algorithm. We have an input x, which is an instance of the
problem we're talking about. And we say it's length is N. And we want the space bound of
this verifier to be S sub n. So, so far, it's normal and we
have a witness or a proof w, which is itself a string, so that, that's just like with NP. Now, here's the key difference. The length of w is arbitrary. It can be much bigger than the
space bound here, unlike NP, where it doesn't make sense
to have the witness length be longer than the time allowed or else he couldn't even
read the whole witness. But here the witness could be
much bigger than the space, so we can still read
the whole thing without ever you loading it all into
the read-write memory at once. Now, we demand that v has read-only access to both of its
inputs, both x and w. It can read them, but I can't right? Now here's where it gets technical. This is why I don't prefer this
characterization that these are technical things you have
to do to actually make this map onto the previous slide. It has random access to X so
it can jump anywhere in to x. I'm already say it's a Turing machine and
maybe it's not random access, but it can slide the tape head
back and forth like normal. It has only sequential
access to bits of w. And here's the key. You don't even have a tape
that can move left or right. It can only move from left
to right, kinda like a DFA. So you can choose when you want
to look at the next bit of w. But once you've done that,
you can never look at any previous bits that
you want to remember, any previous bits
you have to remember them in the read-write memory. And that can be much
smaller than W itself. So that is the technical
stuff that we have to add on. Now, from now on, it is just like the definition
of NP for this verifier. For us to say it works, we need that x is a yes instance. If and only if there's a witness
w that makes dx x XW accept. And notice I didn't
say there's a w in some set of strings of a certain way that could
be an arbitrary length W. Okay, so why is it that we make this strange requirements about access and limits of w in this way. Well, if we didn't
make this requirement, then I'm going to say we
could encode NP-complete problems using only
logarithmic space. Mating because we're not counting
the space of the witness, right? So if for instance the Hamiltonian path problem would be in L and we'd have n l equals np. I'm not going to go through
that here on the slide. But the way you would do it is
to argue that if you had read, write access to w or sorry, not really red, but if we had, if we could go back and forth
and read bits of w over again, we can actually execute the
hand path verifier on it. So I won't go through that now, but feel free to ask
about that if it's not clear how you would do that.-e 

en-ECS 220 8b_8.2 Reachability.txt

So we're going to talk about
this problem, reachability. And it's not just
some example problem. This is going to be a
very central problem in the study of space
bounded computation. And this is the problem
given a directed graph. So sometimes this is called
directed reachability and there's an interesting
undirected variant of it. But the problem is
given a directed graph, G and two nodes in the graph, is there a path from S to T? So can you reach from S to T? So the claim is that reachability, is it solvable in nondeterministic
logarithmic space? So pause right now, think about why that is. So here is an algorithm to do it. We want to know in G, can we reach from S to T? So what we do is we
start the node U and S, and we're going to count how
many nodes we've searched. And we say, well, while u is not equal to T, just guess a neighbor of
u and switch you to that. So basically this mix, if you want to think about
the guest being random, it's taking a random walk on
the graph starting at node u. Just set u to v. And
then repeat, right? Just keep doing that
until you is equal to t because that don't do it forever. If there is a path from u to v, then there's one of length at most. And the cardinality of E. So there's no point in search
in longer paths than that. So if there is actually a path, There's a way to guess here
so that it takes fewer than n steps to get there. So that's why we keep
track of them search, and if it gets too big, we quit and we say false. But what if we do find that
we can set u equal to t? O is a path from S to T, right? To note lots, even if there
is a path from S to T, like any non-deterministic
computation. Most of the paths don't find it, but one of them well, and if
there's no path from S to T, it doesn't matter what
we guess here, no path, well, so that justifies the
correctness of the algorithm. So now, right, and notice it's non-deterministic
because of this guessing. Okay, so now the claim is that it takes only
log space. Why is that? Well, let's count the memory
needed in addition to the input that we consider read-only. What variables are
we actually writing? 2, we have u, we have b,
and we have num search. And all of those take log of number
of nodes, bits to represent. And what do we say log spaces, it's a constant number of
pointers into the input, right? But that's essentially
what u and v are. And then this num searched
takes space log of e is one. So we have only a constant number 10, so it takes o of log space. Okay, so now we're going to talk a little bit about why
is reachability so central to studying space
bounded computation. So if our non-deterministic
program uses space S and we want to use that
program to search a graph. Well, we can search graph of size
up to two to the s, Meaning. Right? Because you can store three, No, two nodes, u and v. And so that's enough to search
graphs with this many nodes. In other words, like, let's
say polynomial space, these are like internet size graphs. So let's flip this around now. Every non-deterministic
program in some sense is completely defined by its
configuration reachability graph. What does that graph? So this is the graph where V is the set of all configurations of the program at
the state of memory. If you're talking about
a Turing machine, that means configuration
by the normal definition, that's a Python program. It's all the memory
that you need to know, to know what to do Next. And you put an edge between two nodes if there's a transition
from one to the other. And note that if it's a
non-deterministic machine, you might have many edges
coming out of the represented. You can do more than
one thing, or sorry, coming out of you representing that you can do more than
one next step from you. But what you can do is completely
captured by that set of edges. Now, it's also no problem to assume that we only have a single
accepting configuration, right? If not, then just rewrite
your Turing machine, say so it erases all the
tapes before it halts. So that, you know, we did that. It would decide the same language and now all the accepting configuration
would look identical. Now, recall deterministic
programs have a line graph. There's always only one
next node you can go to. Nondeterministic is more general. Okay? So in fact, we can say that every problem in n space of S is equivalent
to a reachability problem. We want to know on input x, does the machine,
except if we're asking, well, is there a way, is there a sequence of
nondeterministic choices to reach the accept state? Well, that's the same thing as just asking in this configuration graph, if we assume there's only a
single accepting configuration. Once we know x, we
know what the start configuration c axes
and we're just asking, can we reach from CX day? They answer to that is the
answer to the question, does that Turing machine except x? So reachability, recall is solvable, say using depth-first search in time, big O of the number of nodes
plus the number of IT. So now we're going to
relate this to time. And since we're talking
here about we have space S. So the graph hat size up
to two to the s, right? Which bounds the time. Well, then that means that we need only time O
of 2 to the 0 of S, right? And no, we're saying here
that the number of edges, which in general graphs can be quadratically bigger than
the number of nodes. But not in this kind of graph because we only have 0, 1 out-degree. Because we assume that when we define our terms and
in fact it's out-degree two. If we just assume that you can make a single binary
non-deterministic choice. So this gives us a sort of reproof
of what we already observed, which is that any problems solvable in n space of S is solvable
in time two to the 0 of this. By solving reachability on the configuration reachability
graph of the space bounded machine, which gives these two corollaries. And L is contained in P, NP space is contained in x.-e 

en-ECS 220 8b_8.3-1 NL-completeness and logspace reductions.txt

We'll now introduce the
concept of nl completeness, which is similar to NP-Completeness, but for this nondeterministic
log-space class, and it has somehow
the same bearing on L versus NL as NP-completeness
has on P versus NP. So we just showed that the graph reachability problem is solvable in nondeterministic
log-space, it's in and L. And that every problem in et al is equivalent to a reachability problem
on a polynomial sized graph. So we're now going to define
this notion of nl completeness. We will show formally that
reachability is NL complete. And the consequences that will be that L equals L if and only
if reachability is an L. So this is somehow similar to P equals NP if and only if SAT is NP. So in some sense, the question, does non-determinism help with log-space computations can be
entirely boil down to the question, well, can we solve reachability
deterministically and log-space? If so, everything else you can do
and non-deterministic log-space, you can also do deterministically. So it's very similar to how SAT is one of the hardest problems in NP. If it's in B, everything else. And NB also is. Now unlike that, people aren't quite as convinced
that they're unequal. Like it could go either way. Actually, I think there's
some people convinced that, yeah, these two are probably equal. We'll see that there are a lot
closer in some sense than, than we believe P and NP are. Okay. So to define the notion
of nl completeness, we need a notion of reduction. And similar to how the reductions
we use for NP-Completeness need to be polynomial time for
them to get what we want. If we allow them to be
exponential time, for instance, they could just solve the
problem we're talking about directly and they wouldn't actually help us relate the two problem. So similarly, since the natural notion here
is logarithmic space bounds, we don't want to allow
the reduction to use more resources than we want for the, the algorithm solving the
problems are talking about. So we need a notion of
a log-space reduction. And it just means that this
function from 01 star does their own star is log-space and it's computable by O of log n
space bounded outward. And if so we write a is log-space reducible to be
using this little symbol. So because this thing
outputs a whole string, we have to use this
convention I mentioned where the output needs
to be handled specially. So the input is read only as always. It could be, by
definition linear space. Because the inputs, what's defining, how we're measuring everything else? The output can be much
bigger than the space bound. So to keep from cheating, we require it to be right only. And then the work tape or
the working memory is read, write that only the word tape
counts against the space usage. Now, this may look
pretty restrictive, but actually most reductions used in NP-Completeness Proofs
are already log-space. So for example, think of
the very easy reduction from clique to independent set. Where on input a graph, you keep the nodes the same and
you just flip all the edges. You just go to every pair of nodes, remove an edge if they have one, add an edge if they doubt. So, think about how to do that
With only logarithmic space. So what do we do? We're trying to go into every
pair of nodes and we're trying to determine do we
want to add the edge UV to, to our output, right? Do we want to write a one
say in the adjacency matrix? Well, how do we know
whether to do that? Well, we just need to query is UV an edge in the input
graph and then negate. So at any given time, we only need like these two pointers, u and v into the input and the
output to know what to do. So actually, being computable and log-space is actually the norm
for most of these things. And in fact, some textbooks
like Papadimitriou's textbook, they actually define NP completeness
using Labspace reductions. So now the rest looks
similar to NP-Completeness. Just substituting animal,
we say B is NP-Complete. It first of all, it's
contained in et al, and it's NL hard ware et al. Hard means every single
problem in NP reduces to it. Okay, so the claim is that log splay, log-space reductions are transitive, just like polynomial time reductions. In other words, if there's a reduction from a to
b and from b to c, then there's a third reduction
from a directly to C. Now why is that? Really pause and think about this and this is actually not nearly as obvious as in the case of
polynomial time reductions. So you gotta be pretty
careful with how you do it. So pause and think about why
it might not be obvious. Okay, So if you do the natural thing of just chain the two
reductions together, it can be very slow, right? You need to do a lot
of re-computation to already computed bits
just to save space. So why would you have to do that? Well, it's because you can't just do the reduction from a
to B and write down that output on your work
tape and then give it to the reduction from B to C.
That output is really big. That's why we make it right only. So it's not a possibility to
just write it straight there. So there is a way to handle this. We can talk about it in lecture if, if you don't see it, but think
about it right now on your own.-e 

en-ECS 220 8b_8.3-2 NL-WitnessExistence and Reachability are NL-complete.txt

All right, so just as
with NP-completeness, to get our foot in the door, we're first going to define
a fairly artificial problem whose sole purpose is
just to be NL complete. And then we'll reduce
it to reachability, to show reachability is. So this is similar to the first
NP-Complete problem we study. This one's called an
L witness existence. So very similar. We're given a non-deterministic
program P and input k. But then unlike witness existence, where we're given a time-bound, now we're given a space bound. So we're given an
integer k in urinary. So the format is exactly the same, but the question we ask is
now about memory instead. And the question is, is there a sequence of guesses that p can make on input x so that it accepts while at the same time using at most log of
k bits of memory. So that's one distinction is that we're naturally baking that
the logarithm into this. We're not asking and
k bits of memory, we're asking about log
of K, that's okay. So the easier thing to see is
actually that It's et al hard. So for any language and et al, what puts it in and out,
What's the definition? Well, there's an O of log of n. So c times log of n for some
constant c space bounded program P. So that decides it. So to reduce a to NO
witness existence to know. Okay. Is it should is my
input in a or is it not? Does P accepted or not? On input x? I want to know that I should
output Pete, the Triple P, x and k for NO witness a distance
where p is the decider program, x is the input and k is what? Pause and think about it. So should be n to the c. And the reason is that we need to count how many ones that
the reduction has written. And that's going to
take log of n to the c, which is the same as c
times log n bits to store. Okay, so the slightly trickier thing is actually to show that
it's contained in L. And this is why we had to do
this a urinary tract up here. So here is a non-deterministic
logarithmic space program that decides and witness existence. So given input px k, What does it do? Well, it does what you'd expect. It runs p on input x to
see whether it accepts. But at the same time it
has to check it, right. It's not just asking, does it, except we don't know whether
p is space bounded or not. So we're also given the
space span and we have to ensure that P does not
exceed the space bounds. We check that it never
exceed the log again. The reason we gave k and unerring
because it's given an urinary. That means that the space found
on q is at most log of n, right? The reasons that it uses space
log of x to do this check, or log, sorry, log of
k to do this check. But because we put k in urinary, What's the size of cues input? Well, it's this Triple, P, x, and k altogether. And that triple is at least as
big as just the last element k. So the last element k is at least n, or sorry, is at most n, where n is the size of
the entire thing, right? So that gives us that k is at most n. So log of k is at most n. So q itself is log of
its input space bounded. So this isn't totally
straightforward, so it can be confusing. Be sure to ask about it in lecture. We need to talk about it some more. Okay, so now we want to argue that. So this shows that witness
existence NL complete. Now we want to argue that this
more natural problem reachability. So I'm going to reduce and witness
existence to reachability. We already showed
reachability is contained in. So let's just state what does
it mean to do this reduction. The reduction on input px
k For Witness existence. We need to output some pain of the format reachability
expects a graph and to know, so what are G, S, and T going to be? So let's just restate what is it
that we need the reduction to do? We need that p on
input x accepts using at most log of k space
if and only if there's a path from S to T and G. So pause
and think about what should GB, what should SP, what should TB? So we'll define g to be the
configuration reachability graph of p, but not the whole thing, actually the k space bound. Again, there's no guarantee that P actually uses only log of k space. It could use more. We're trying to answer the question, does it except using
at most that space. So in fact, we don't define the
whole graph, we cut it off. And if ever there's a transition that's going to use more
than log of k space. We actually don't consider that, that node it would go to. So, so the set of nodes is the set of all configurations of p that use
at most log of k space, right? Things PIE might do, but we don't consider them. And then the edges is the
set of all configurations u and v so that p can go
from u to v in one step, you know, maybe
non-deterministically, maybe there's other things
p could do from you, but this is one of the
things you can do. And then we set S to be the
starting configuration on input x. And recall we can set it up so that P has a unique accepting
configuration that's going to be t.-e 

en-ECS 220 8c_8.4 Savitch's theorem space-bounded deterministic simulation of space-bounded nondeterminism, space usage of Savitch_s algorithm.txt

So now we'll think about transforming non-deterministic
computations into deterministic ones. So simulating non-determinism
deterministically. Now recall we did this with
non-deterministic time, and it seems new and current
exponential time overhead. For example, NP is contained
in x because you can run all possible witnesses of
which there are exponentially many through the polynomial
time verification algorithm. And more generally, n time of T is contained and deterministic
time to, to the OT. And in general, we don't know
how to do any better with time. And we have good reasons to think you really can't do better than that. But we can provably do
much better with space and currying only a quadratic
simulation over. So this is what we call
salvage his theorem, which says that for any space
bound at least logarithmic, which is all the ones we
consider in this class. N space of S is contained
in space of S squared. So the corollary is that NP space
is actually equal to p space, which is why we never
talk about NP space. I'd certainly doesn't
deserve its own name. And another corollary is that NL, when we substitute S is log of n and l is contained in
space of log squared of N. So note that's polylogarithmic, but it's not logarithmic. Log square root of n is
not big O of log of n. And in fact, the space hierarchy
theorem tells us that L, which is space of log n, is not equal to space
of log square root of n. Log n is little o
of log squared of N. So there's things you can
do with this much space. You provably can't do
with this much space. So we still don't know
whether l equals n. Now, can we prove that L is actually contained in
an even smaller class? Well, we don't know. Okay, So, but we do know we can do this. So that's savages there. And so we can restate it as reachability is contained in
space of log squared of N, right? So this is, this is the entire
sort of point of the algorithm. And through the fact
that you can reduce all those space founded
computation's to reachability. You can get this to apply
to to others based classes. So kind of the, the most important cases captured by, by showing this. So recall that breadth-first search and depth-first search each
use linear memory, right? You don't think about
the memory usage much, but if you think about
how they both work, they both maintain a set
of nodes you've already visited to avoid visiting
the same node twice. So you have to store in your read write memory
all the visited nodes. They use linear memory. So they're legit search algorithms
and they run pretty fast there. They're linear time, but, but they use linear memory. How can we get that down to only
logs square root of n space? So salvage his algorithm, the textbook describes
as not breadth-first, not that first, but
middle first search. And what it does is it
visits each node repeatedly. It does not avoid visiting
the same node twice. It revisits a whole
bunch of nodes and in fact does it so often
it takes a lot of time, but it saves on space. So here's the key observation. Let S and T be two nodes and
then k be a positive integer. And we write S arrow Katie to denote there is a path of
length at most k from S to T. So that's what this notation means. We're going to use this repeatedly. There's a path from S to
T of length at most k. So here's an easy observation that there's a path from
S to T of length at most k if and only if there's
a middle point where you, where there's a path from S to
U of length at most half of K, and a path from u to t of
length at most half of K. So in other words, there is this path the squiggly thing represents maybe
there's many nodes along here. This is true if and only if
there's some you that you encounter halfway
through on that back. So this is going to be the key to the algorithm because it
gives us a way to recurse. And in particular,
note that we can apply that same statement to S and
U with K equals K over 2. So if there's a path
from S to U, well, there's a middle point, u1, midway between S and U. And if there's a path from u to t, then there's a middle point,
U2 midway between UAT. So this gives the basis
of the algorithm. And here it is in
Python ESC pseudocode. This is salvage his algorithm. We're given a graph G and S and T, and then we're given a bound k. We, when we called this at first, we just set K equal to the
number of nodes in the graph. So we want to know, is it possible to reach from
S to t using at most k nodes. So if k is one, what does that mean? Well, what does it mean to
have a path of length at most one I did as a
direct edge from S to T. Or the path could be length 0, that's length at most one. So S could just be equal to t. So if either of these is true, then we say, yes, there is a path of
length at most one. So that's the base case
and the recursive case. We do this search, we iterate
over every single node in you. And we ask, is it
possible to get from S to U and half as many steps as this end. Is it possible to get from u
to t and half as many steps? And if so, we return true. And if we don't find that
middle point, we return false. So by this observation, if we call this with K equal to the number of
nodes in the whole graph. It will eventually get
down to a base case and it will correctly identify
whether this path exists. So now we got to analyze
the space usage. So here's the same algorithm. I just rewrote it. Let's
call n the number of nodes. Now notice each level of recursion
has four variables, STU and k. And each of them are just indices into g or just a number that is at most n. So each of them takes at
most log of n bits to represent. So what we gotta do now is bound how many levels of
recursion are going to happen? Because that will bound for us
how big does the stack yet, meaning the call stack
as we recurse, right? We're going to have to remember the variables at each
level of recursion. We're going to bound
the depth of recursion. So we make the first call and
we call reachable of GST and n. And we're going to have log n
levels of recursion because they're cutting K and a half each
time and it starts at it. So what do we need? We have log n levels of recursion. And each level of recursion
takes O of log n bits. It's four times log n bits. So the total number of bits than
ever need to be stored at once, considering the entire
call stack is log squared of N log n levels times
log n bits per level. So that shows that reachability this recursive algorithm uses at
most log square root of n bits. Now recall that predicting whether a non-deterministic program
will accept using at most as in space is equivalent to reachability on a graph of
size two to the s at it. So this is an argument that, well, we weren't just talking about log-space and log
square root of n space. Here we're at, we're actually talking about every space found above there. Because that graph can actually be the computation graph of an
algorithm with a bigger space bound. Whatever that space bound is, two to that number is how many
nodes is in its reachability graph. By querying reachability
using savages algorithm, we can predict that. And so what that shows us
is that if we want to know, does that algorithm,
which is S space bounded, that does it except using at
most space bound S. We can solve that deterministically using salvage his algorithm on the graph
is in space of S square. So this actually applies to all
the bigger space bounds as well. So the open question is, is salvage his algorithm optimal? Right? Do we need this quadratic blowup? So here's some open questions. Is there a log to the
1.99 and space algorithm? I just log raised to any
power less than two. That's totally. And of course, a much
stronger connector is, is there a log n space
algorithm, right? If so, because reachability
is NL complete, that would imply that L
equals n. That would show reachability is n. Now this is not
as unbelievable as P equals NP. People are kinda sure about that.-e 

en-ECS 220 8c_8.6-1 Reachability expressed logically, and as a game between prover and skeptic.txt

So remember that one
way we characterize NP is a language is an NP
means that for any string x, x is in the language
if and only if there is a W of polynomial length and x, such that the verifier VA, which is polynomial time, accepts x and w. And recall that this
was generalized to this whole polynomial hierarchy
where we can ask, okay, Given a verifier that
takes many witnesses, it takes the input x, but
also the W1, W2, et cetera. It can alternate the
quantifiers, they can ask, is there a w1 so that for all w two, there is a W3C For all
w four, et cetera. The accepts all of them. And again, they're all
polynomial length bounded. The verifier is still required
to be polynomial time. And up here we just had one witness. Now we alternate k times between witnesses that k is
just a constant, right? So the witnesses can be
length polynomial in x, but there's a constant
number of witnesses. It doesn't depend at
all. On x itself. There's a surprising
characterization. It turns out if we relax that and allow more than a
constant number of witnesses, we allow a polynomial number of
alternation between the witnesses. We exactly get polynomial space. This is very surprising and it was a very surprising to
me when I first heard this. So this is not at all obvious to me. And the proof is not obvious, but we have the tools to prove it now. So we're
going to go through that. All right, so the key idea
here is that based on x, you choose based on x, how many rounds of alternation
there's going to be. Okay, so how can we express right? And again, remember reachability, reachability problem
somehow characterizes the space founded complexity classes. So the key idea here is
going to be to express reachability with
logical quantifiers. So here's the desired
predicate we wanted to define. It is essentially the
reachability statement. And it's, takes three inputs, an S to T and a k, two nodes n, an integer bound k. And this
expresses there is a path in some, in this graph from S to
T of length at most k. So this is the predicate
we want to define. We want to define it using the logical quantifiers
exist and for all, as well as the other tools of Boolean logic like
negation and an or. Now our basic predicate, that's quote, obviously computable, but just by looking at the graph
and our input is called E of UV. And this expresses not quite. There's an edge from u to be, either there's an edge from u to v, or u is just equal to d. So this is the basic
predicate, our UV one, there's a path from u to
v of length, at most one, it's equal to one if
there's an edge and it's equal to 0 if they're
just the same node. So that's sort of obviously
it is computable. Now the goal is to use only
first order quantifiers. There's some technical
reasons for this, but what First-order means
when we're talking about graphs is that when
you write exist, you. The exists ranges over all nodes. You can't range over
all sets of note, this is like a technical
thing we're not going to get into mostly cuz I don't
totally understand it. But that would be the so-called
second-order quantifiers. If the exists, we're allowed to
range over all sets of nodes. Okay, so let's just
start by writing down the most obvious way to express
our STK using logical quantifiers. Well, it'll just be, you know, do a bunch of existence string a bunch of the basic
predicates together. So there's a path from S to
T of length at most k if and only if there exists these k
minus one intermediate nodes, which are the nodes you
go to along the path. So that there's an
edge from S to U one, there's an edge from U1, U2, from U2, U3, etcetera on to
UK minus one to t, right? And those all have to be true. So this expresses, this is always using the first
case that there's an edge, not that they're equal, which
would be wasteful here. So, okay, so that logically
expresses this predicate using only existential quantifiers and these ends between
the basic predicates. But it doesn't quite
get what we want. The quantified logical formula. We want to be size polynomial
in the input, right? That was the requirement
we set for ourselves. We're going to use grass that are exponentially larger than
the input because the graphs represent the computation graph
of an algorithm on that input, the algorithm space bounded, it can have a huge running times. In many nodes in this graph, k could be really large. But this is using up to all the
nodes in the graph possibly. So this doesn't work
exactly as written. Essentially this is
showing reachability is an NB using the whole path
from S to T is the witness. But this is not what we need to show. We need to show that no matter even up to this
exponential size graph, we can use a formula, the size and whose number of
alternations polynomial in the input. So here's an idea
for how to fix this. We use middle first search. This is savages there. So our SDK, there's a path from S
to T of length at most k. Well, remember this key observation That's true if and only if
there's a midpoint, you k over 2. So if there's a midpoint,
nerds as the UK, and we can get from S to U, K over 2 and at most cavities steps. And we can get from UK over two to
t and most Cambridge who steps, then that's equivalent
to we can get from S to T and at most k steps. And we can recurse on that. We could say, well, each of these can be
expressed by splitting them into a pair of predicates, each asking about a quarter path. And we could keep recursing
until we get down to this. And we would just have there
exists these nodes and these, oh, this is exactly what we
had in the slide before. So this recursion was a
good idea except when we boiled it down to
what would it turn and do once we expand out the recursion is just precisely the
thing we wrote before. There's an edge from S to U
one, there's an edge from U1, U2 and so on up from
UK minus one to t. So that didn't quite work because this could be way too long
as could be exponential. This k could be exponential
in the size of the input. So now, let's wait and observe
what's happening here. That exists. Shorthand for a long string of
wars to write there exists a u, so that's some predicate. Phi of u is true. That's the same thing as
saying Phi of u 1 is true, or phi of u two is true, or that it up to Phi of UN is true. If you wonder you enter
all the possible nodes, you could make it, right. That's, these are equivalent. And similarly for all is a shorthand
for a very long string of n. So for all u, Phi of u is true, is the same as saying, well, phi of u honest true, and Phi of u two is true and
on up to Phi of u n is true. So we can replace this
very long string of ends with a single for all. And in fact, the way we're
going to do is we won't need to replace a
long string of ends. We're just going to replace them
one at a time in the recursion, but it will avoid in the end
is very long string down here. So let's go back to the start again. Use this middle first search
idea and first say our SDK, which means there's a path from
S to T of length at most k. Let's use middle first
search and observe that, well, that's equivalent to
there is a midpoint U1, meaning there's a path from S to
U on of length at most k over 2. And there's a path from one to
t of length at most k over 2. But now let's replace
that end with a for all. It's a really trivial for all. It's like the easiest
for all There it is. It's only sort of searching over
two different possible variables. But what we're doing
is we're looking at, well, what are these two expressions
have in common the k over 2, but where are they different? They have a different pair. First inputs, here,
the first input is S, and you want, here are the
first two inputs, U1 and teeth. So we just replace
those with variables. And we say, well, this is equivalent to for all A1, B1 in this set, the set only has two things in S1, u1 and u and t r of A1B1, k over 2 is true. Okay? So we replace that
end with a for all. Okay? So now how can we recurse on this
expression rv A1B1 k over two? What should we write here? So pause and think about that. Well, this looks very much like
the first step we had here. We can again use the middle
first search idea and say, well, that's equivalent to there being
a midpoint between A1 and B1. But rather than writing
them at the end, we write it with the for all. So there's a midpoint, you too. So that for all A1, B1 in this set, A1 to A2 or U2 to B1 are of A2B2. K over four is true. Okay, So let's start the intuition starting to get a bit lost here, but just convince yourself
each step is equivalent. And when we're done, after we've gone down to log
of K levels of recursion, eggs are cutting cane
half every time. So we get down to
where we've got m of these alternation of
quantifiers exist for all A1, B1 air exists you to
for all A2V2 there. And we do this. M times n is only the log of k. So the size of this
formula is log of K. So it can handle an exponential size graph with only a polynomial size formula. So this is the key step to proving that reachability can be
characterized logically in this way. And because reachability
is a stand-in for a space bounded
complexity classes like, like P space that
shows P space can be characterized in this way
because the reachability on exponential size graphs is that the problem that
characterizes piece? So let's just conclude with
another way to think about this. Reachability has a game between
approver and a skeptic, and this'll come up later when
we talk about real games. So the prover says,
I claim that we can get from node to node T in k steps, like at most k steps by
going through midpoint yuan. And the skeptic says,
add, I believe you, how can you get firm has to
u1 and K over two steps. And the purposes as well
by going through YouTube. That's the midpoint
between those two. And the skeptic says, Oh yeah, how can you get from u two to u one and only k over four steps
if you choose the midpoint. Well, if I go into u3 and they
interact like this and at some point they reach
a pair of nodes Kept. This is really how can you get from U6 to you ate and just one step. And the prover says, Wow, there's just an edge,
follow the edge. The skeptic says, Okay, Yeah, you're right, but this is just
the middle of a bunch of claims. I'm skeptical about the backup
to use six to 13 into steps. So this multi-step sort of interactive proof is somehow
a generalization of NP. Np, there's one around, right? The prover gives you this witness and the verifier verifies, uh,
and, and they're just done. P spaces like that, except you can go
for polynomial and n many rounds of interaction this way.-e 

en-ECS 220 8c_8.6-2 PSPACE-completeness.txt

As we've seen, how p space can
be characterized in a sense with this alternating prover
verifier scheme. But it can seem a bit abstract. So what we're gonna
do now is prove that a particular problem is P space
complete called Quantified SAT. And with quantified side, it's a little easier to see how the sort of game
characterization looks. So to start with, as we usually do when we show a
problem is complete for a class, we need an original problem,
obviously complete. So space predict is this problem. Given a program P and an input
x and an integer m and urinary. The question is, does ps except
using at most m bits of memory. So it's similar to the last
prediction when we saw, except we're not taking the log
of them in the question here, m is written in urinary, but it is just an exact space bound. So that's sort of obviously
p space complete. Again, we won't go through
that exercise here. It's similar to others, but ask
about it in lecture if you want. Okay, so here is a version of satisfiability that's
phrased like again. So we're given a Boolean formula
phi that takes N bits of input. And the gain is the two players take turns
setting the input variables. And player one sets the first, and then player two
sets the second one, and then players
three sets the third. And player one wins if
they can make fee true. But player two wins and
they can make feet false. And the question is, does Player
one have a winning strategy? Right? Until it's like a game variant, instead of just asking, is
there some way to make it true? We're asking, well, can
player one make it true? Even though Player one only
gets to set every other bit, player two gets to set
the remaining beds, particularly based on what
bits Player 1 has set so far. Okay, so here is a problem Q
SAT called Quantified SAT. And actually I'm just going to clamp. It's equivalent to two players that it's just a different
way of phrasing it. So ask about that in
lecture if it's not clear. So again, you're given a Boolean
formula phi that takes n inputs. And the question is you let psi be a formula with
no inputs, right? So it, it has no inputs. It's just a statement that's
either true or false. And we want to know, is it true? And that is the statement. There exists, you know, a bit, we can set x1 to that. For all bits we get set x2 to the frog here is that you
know this and for all there, just over individual bit. So this is just saying it's possible to set x one
equal to 0 or a one. So that no matter which
bit you set x to do, there's a bit too assigned x3. So no matter the bed
assignments for et cetera, that assignment makes fee true. So that can be done. Then the quantified
statement phi is true. And note the satisfiability problem is the case of this when you have
no for all, so you're asking, does there exist a bit x1, n, does there exist a bit x2, and there exists a bit
X3 that makes this true. So here every other one is a furrow. Okay, so first, convince yourself that this is
contained in P space, that we can decide whether
this is the case or not using only polynomial space. So note that it's not an NP problem, or at least we think it's not. But we can actually find out the question to this
in polynomial space. So what we're going to do, right? So convince yourself
that that's true if it's not clear, ask in lecture. So it's NP space. So we want to show it's P space hard. In other words, everything in
p space reduces do it well, we'll do that by showing space
predict is reducible to Q set. And this will be our normal kind
of polynomial time reduction. So in fact, we only needed to be
a polynomial space reduction. Okay, so let's go through
how will show this. So recall for space predict our input is a program be an input to
an X and a space found m. Now, what we're gonna do
is define this graph. And this is the normal computation
graph for p on input x. So vx is the configurations of PX but that USE space
at most n, right? So again, this isn't everything
P could possibly do, may not be m space bounded. So, so this may artificially
constrained to make some configurations unreachable
because they use too much space. So V is only the things that
are reachable that space them. And the edges are that you
can go to V and one step. Okay? And what is it that
would make p except x? Well, you know, given our sort of statement of how to characterize
P space, sort of computations. That's true if and only if the
following predicate is true. Rst, like the Bazin, Remember what does that mean? It means in this graph, it is possible to reach from the initial configuration
of p and x to t, The unique accepting
configuration of p. In at most this many steps where this
is just all the configurations. There are these things truly
and space bounded, right? So this is kind of a
weak bound right here. We of course need at
most this many of us are just all the configurations. And remember that we argued it was possible to
rewrite this predicate using an alternation of exists and quantify as an end
date and a predicate. That's a simple one, or
are you just asking about this AN BM configurations
you're asking, Well, can we reach from
AMD BM in just one step? So that is going to be our quantified formula
that we output for Q SAT. We're trying to, on input, this input to space predict, output a quantified formula
that is true if and only if p on input x accepts
using the most space. So this does it almost, right? This is almost what we need. Now, there's a couple of technicalities to do with these
slight differences between. Q SAT. And the way that a
formula like this works, one is that Q SAT is defined to alternate between exists and
for all on every single bit. But this is a little
bit higher level. The, the use and the A's and
the B's, they're not one bit. Each, each of them is
a node in a graph, so each of them requires
several bits to represent. So we want to actually do
exist on several bits and then for all and several bits
and then exists on several bits, not to alternate exists
for all every single bed. Now this is not too difficult
to fix to put a formula like this in the format cues that expects where it
alternates on every bit. So think about how to
do that for yourself. If it's not clear, we can
talk about it in lecture. Okay, so the trickier issue is
going to be this, that this, when we do rewrite this so that we have these for alls
are over every possible bit. Well, remember the way
we actually wrote this, I'm sort of short name the shorthand. But if you go back to
the slide where we showed that this
equivalence can hold. While the for all A1B1, it wasn't over every
possible sequence of bits you could assigned to A1, B1. They were constrained to refer to
two particular painters, right? Until we go back to that. Right? Remember we were looking at existing ones for all
A1B1 in this set. The set is S comma u
one and u one comma t. And same thing, there exists U2. So that for all a to
b two in this set, it wasn't over all possible bits
you could right here it would be, There's only two pairs
you want to allow. So, so we have a problem here
because the way Q SAT is written, it just says for all bits, but we need to constrain a t d t for each t between one and m and
not allow them to be any bits. So the teeth moves of the form
for all a TBT in that sense, a sub t minus 1, UT and UT comment bt minus 1. So we have this game between
the prover and the skeptic. The, the prover gives, does the exists, the
skeptic does the for all. So the skeptic is picking these beds. This is like player two in the game. We need to make sure that
the skeptic actually pits, picks bits that encode and
80 VT and this, right? But the skeptic is trying to argue, Well, we're not correct, right? So we did nothing. The skeptic could just pick
some bits that don't look like this and the answer enforce
the answer to be no, which is what the
skeptic wants to do. Skeptics player two in the game. Okay, so here's the facts. Remember that the player one that the prover is trying to make
the whole formula true. Player to the skeptic is
trying to make it false. So we make it so that if the skeptic picks an a TBT
that's not in the set, the prover automatically wins, right? So the final predicate that
we check where we just check, oh, is this edge a comma b? And I'm sorry, this pair in
the set of edges in the graph. We change it from
that to say, well no, there's actually more ways
the prover could win. Either this is in the edge set or any of these conditions is
true, and then the prover wins. And what are these conditions? Well, these conditions just check that the various
a's and b's were illegal, that each a TBT was
actually an element from the set based on the previous 80
minus 1 and b t minus one, right? So we're just checking
if a2 is not equal to b1 and b2 is not equal
to y2, et cetera. And if a2 is not equal to U2
or B2 is not equal to B1, that would mean for t equals
one, this was violated. So if the skeptic picks bits
so that this is untrue, the prover automatically wins, so it's not in the skeptics
interest Back button. So the only way to make all of these falls is to actually
pick a DVT like this. And then the only way to pick
those to make this false is if the quantified formula
is actually false.-e 

