All right, so just as
with NP-completeness, to get our foot in the door, we're first going to define
a fairly artificial problem whose sole purpose is
just to be NL complete. And then we'll reduce
it to reachability, to show reachability is. So this is similar to the first
NP-Complete problem we study. This one's called an
L witness existence. So very similar. We're given a non-deterministic
program P and input k. But then unlike witness existence, where we're given a time-bound, now we're given a space bound. So we're given an
integer k in urinary. So the format is exactly the same, but the question we ask is
now about memory instead. And the question is, is there a sequence of guesses that p can make on input x so that it accepts while at the same time using at most log of
k bits of memory. So that's one distinction is that we're naturally baking that
the logarithm into this. We're not asking and
k bits of memory, we're asking about log
of K, that's okay. So the easier thing to see is
actually that It's et al hard. So for any language and et al, what puts it in and out,
What's the definition? Well, there's an O of log of n. So c times log of n for some
constant c space bounded program P. So that decides it. So to reduce a to NO
witness existence to know. Okay. Is it should is my
input in a or is it not? Does P accepted or not? On input x? I want to know that I should
output Pete, the Triple P, x and k for NO witness a distance
where p is the decider program, x is the input and k is what? Pause and think about it. So should be n to the c. And the reason is that we need to count how many ones that
the reduction has written. And that's going to
take log of n to the c, which is the same as c
times log n bits to store. Okay, so the slightly trickier thing is actually to show that
it's contained in L. And this is why we had to do
this a urinary tract up here. So here is a non-deterministic
logarithmic space program that decides and witness existence. So given input px k, What does it do? Well, it does what you'd expect. It runs p on input x to
see whether it accepts. But at the same time it
has to check it, right. It's not just asking, does it, except we don't know whether
p is space bounded or not. So we're also given the
space span and we have to ensure that P does not
exceed the space bounds. We check that it never
exceed the log again. The reason we gave k and unerring
because it's given an urinary. That means that the space found
on q is at most log of n, right? The reasons that it uses space
log of x to do this check, or log, sorry, log of
k to do this check. But because we put k in urinary, What's the size of cues input? Well, it's this Triple, P, x, and k altogether. And that triple is at least as
big as just the last element k. So the last element k is at least n, or sorry, is at most n, where n is the size of
the entire thing, right? So that gives us that k is at most n. So log of k is at most n. So q itself is log of
its input space bounded. So this isn't totally
straightforward, so it can be confusing. Be sure to ask about it in lecture. We need to talk about it some more. Okay, so now we want to argue that. So this shows that witness
existence NL complete. Now we want to argue that this
more natural problem reachability. So I'm going to reduce and witness
existence to reachability. We already showed
reachability is contained in. So let's just state what does
it mean to do this reduction. The reduction on input px
k For Witness existence. We need to output some pain of the format reachability
expects a graph and to know, so what are G, S, and T going to be? So let's just restate what is it
that we need the reduction to do? We need that p on
input x accepts using at most log of k space
if and only if there's a path from S to T and G. So pause
and think about what should GB, what should SP, what should TB? So we'll define g to be the
configuration reachability graph of p, but not the whole thing, actually the k space bound. Again, there's no guarantee that P actually uses only log of k space. It could use more. We're trying to answer the question, does it except using
at most that space. So in fact, we don't define the
whole graph, we cut it off. And if ever there's a transition that's going to use more
than log of k space. We actually don't consider that, that node it would go to. So, so the set of nodes is the set of all configurations of p that use
at most log of k space, right? Things PIE might do, but we don't consider them. And then the edges is the
set of all configurations u and v so that p can go
from u to v in one step, you know, maybe
non-deterministically, maybe there's other things
p could do from you, but this is one of the
things you can do. And then we set S to be the
starting configuration on input x. And recall we can set it up so that P has a unique accepting
configuration that's going to be t.