As we've seen, how p space can
be characterized in a sense with this alternating prover
verifier scheme. But it can seem a bit abstract. So what we're gonna
do now is prove that a particular problem is P space
complete called Quantified SAT. And with quantified side, it's a little easier to see how the sort of game
characterization looks. So to start with, as we usually do when we show a
problem is complete for a class, we need an original problem,
obviously complete. So space predict is this problem. Given a program P and an input
x and an integer m and urinary. The question is, does ps except
using at most m bits of memory. So it's similar to the last
prediction when we saw, except we're not taking the log
of them in the question here, m is written in urinary, but it is just an exact space bound. So that's sort of obviously
p space complete. Again, we won't go through
that exercise here. It's similar to others, but ask
about it in lecture if you want. Okay, so here is a version of satisfiability that's
phrased like again. So we're given a Boolean formula
phi that takes N bits of input. And the gain is the two players take turns
setting the input variables. And player one sets the first, and then player two
sets the second one, and then players
three sets the third. And player one wins if
they can make fee true. But player two wins and
they can make feet false. And the question is, does Player
one have a winning strategy? Right? Until it's like a game variant, instead of just asking, is
there some way to make it true? We're asking, well, can
player one make it true? Even though Player one only
gets to set every other bit, player two gets to set
the remaining beds, particularly based on what
bits Player 1 has set so far. Okay, so here is a problem Q
SAT called Quantified SAT. And actually I'm just going to clamp. It's equivalent to two players that it's just a different
way of phrasing it. So ask about that in
lecture if it's not clear. So again, you're given a Boolean
formula phi that takes n inputs. And the question is you let psi be a formula with
no inputs, right? So it, it has no inputs. It's just a statement that's
either true or false. And we want to know, is it true? And that is the statement. There exists, you know, a bit, we can set x1 to that. For all bits we get set x2 to the frog here is that you
know this and for all there, just over individual bit. So this is just saying it's possible to set x one
equal to 0 or a one. So that no matter which
bit you set x to do, there's a bit too assigned x3. So no matter the bed
assignments for et cetera, that assignment makes fee true. So that can be done. Then the quantified
statement phi is true. And note the satisfiability problem is the case of this when you have
no for all, so you're asking, does there exist a bit x1, n, does there exist a bit x2, and there exists a bit
X3 that makes this true. So here every other one is a furrow. Okay, so first, convince yourself that this is
contained in P space, that we can decide whether
this is the case or not using only polynomial space. So note that it's not an NP problem, or at least we think it's not. But we can actually find out the question to this
in polynomial space. So what we're going to do, right? So convince yourself
that that's true if it's not clear, ask in lecture. So it's NP space. So we want to show it's P space hard. In other words, everything in
p space reduces do it well, we'll do that by showing space
predict is reducible to Q set. And this will be our normal kind
of polynomial time reduction. So in fact, we only needed to be
a polynomial space reduction. Okay, so let's go through
how will show this. So recall for space predict our input is a program be an input to
an X and a space found m. Now, what we're gonna do
is define this graph. And this is the normal computation
graph for p on input x. So vx is the configurations of PX but that USE space
at most n, right? So again, this isn't everything
P could possibly do, may not be m space bounded. So, so this may artificially
constrained to make some configurations unreachable
because they use too much space. So V is only the things that
are reachable that space them. And the edges are that you
can go to V and one step. Okay? And what is it that
would make p except x? Well, you know, given our sort of statement of how to characterize
P space, sort of computations. That's true if and only if the
following predicate is true. Rst, like the Bazin, Remember what does that mean? It means in this graph, it is possible to reach from the initial configuration
of p and x to t, The unique accepting
configuration of p. In at most this many steps where this
is just all the configurations. There are these things truly
and space bounded, right? So this is kind of a
weak bound right here. We of course need at
most this many of us are just all the configurations. And remember that we argued it was possible to
rewrite this predicate using an alternation of exists and quantify as an end
date and a predicate. That's a simple one, or
are you just asking about this AN BM configurations
you're asking, Well, can we reach from
AMD BM in just one step? So that is going to be our quantified formula
that we output for Q SAT. We're trying to, on input, this input to space predict, output a quantified formula
that is true if and only if p on input x accepts
using the most space. So this does it almost, right? This is almost what we need. Now, there's a couple of technicalities to do with these
slight differences between. Q SAT. And the way that a
formula like this works, one is that Q SAT is defined to alternate between exists and
for all on every single bit. But this is a little
bit higher level. The, the use and the A's and
the B's, they're not one bit. Each, each of them is
a node in a graph, so each of them requires
several bits to represent. So we want to actually do
exist on several bits and then for all and several bits
and then exists on several bits, not to alternate exists
for all every single bed. Now this is not too difficult
to fix to put a formula like this in the format cues that expects where it
alternates on every bit. So think about how to
do that for yourself. If it's not clear, we can
talk about it in lecture. Okay, so the trickier issue is
going to be this, that this, when we do rewrite this so that we have these for alls
are over every possible bit. Well, remember the way
we actually wrote this, I'm sort of short name the shorthand. But if you go back to
the slide where we showed that this
equivalence can hold. While the for all A1B1, it wasn't over every
possible sequence of bits you could assigned to A1, B1. They were constrained to refer to
two particular painters, right? Until we go back to that. Right? Remember we were looking at existing ones for all
A1B1 in this set. The set is S comma u
one and u one comma t. And same thing, there exists U2. So that for all a to
b two in this set, it wasn't over all possible bits
you could right here it would be, There's only two pairs
you want to allow. So, so we have a problem here
because the way Q SAT is written, it just says for all bits, but we need to constrain a t d t for each t between one and m and
not allow them to be any bits. So the teeth moves of the form
for all a TBT in that sense, a sub t minus 1, UT and UT comment bt minus 1. So we have this game between
the prover and the skeptic. The, the prover gives, does the exists, the
skeptic does the for all. So the skeptic is picking these beds. This is like player two in the game. We need to make sure that
the skeptic actually pits, picks bits that encode and
80 VT and this, right? But the skeptic is trying to argue, Well, we're not correct, right? So we did nothing. The skeptic could just pick
some bits that don't look like this and the answer enforce
the answer to be no, which is what the
skeptic wants to do. Skeptics player two in the game. Okay, so here's the facts. Remember that the player one that the prover is trying to make
the whole formula true. Player to the skeptic is
trying to make it false. So we make it so that if the skeptic picks an a TBT
that's not in the set, the prover automatically wins, right? So the final predicate that
we check where we just check, oh, is this edge a comma b? And I'm sorry, this pair in
the set of edges in the graph. We change it from
that to say, well no, there's actually more ways
the prover could win. Either this is in the edge set or any of these conditions is
true, and then the prover wins. And what are these conditions? Well, these conditions just check that the various
a's and b's were illegal, that each a TBT was
actually an element from the set based on the previous 80
minus 1 and b t minus one, right? So we're just checking
if a2 is not equal to b1 and b2 is not equal
to y2, et cetera. And if a2 is not equal to U2
or B2 is not equal to B1, that would mean for t equals
one, this was violated. So if the skeptic picks bits
so that this is untrue, the prover automatically wins, so it's not in the skeptics
interest Back button. So the only way to make all of these falls is to actually
pick a DVT like this. And then the only way to pick
those to make this false is if the quantified formula
is actually false.