So we're going to talk about
this problem, reachability. And it's not just
some example problem. This is going to be a
very central problem in the study of space
bounded computation. And this is the problem
given a directed graph. So sometimes this is called
directed reachability and there's an interesting
undirected variant of it. But the problem is
given a directed graph, G and two nodes in the graph, is there a path from S to T? So can you reach from S to T? So the claim is that reachability, is it solvable in nondeterministic
logarithmic space? So pause right now, think about why that is. So here is an algorithm to do it. We want to know in G, can we reach from S to T? So what we do is we
start the node U and S, and we're going to count how
many nodes we've searched. And we say, well, while u is not equal to T, just guess a neighbor of
u and switch you to that. So basically this mix, if you want to think about
the guest being random, it's taking a random walk on
the graph starting at node u. Just set u to v. And
then repeat, right? Just keep doing that
until you is equal to t because that don't do it forever. If there is a path from u to v, then there's one of length at most. And the cardinality of E. So there's no point in search
in longer paths than that. So if there is actually a path, There's a way to guess here
so that it takes fewer than n steps to get there. So that's why we keep
track of them search, and if it gets too big, we quit and we say false. But what if we do find that
we can set u equal to t? O is a path from S to T, right? To note lots, even if there
is a path from S to T, like any non-deterministic
computation. Most of the paths don't find it, but one of them well, and if
there's no path from S to T, it doesn't matter what
we guess here, no path, well, so that justifies the
correctness of the algorithm. So now, right, and notice it's non-deterministic
because of this guessing. Okay, so now the claim is that it takes only
log space. Why is that? Well, let's count the memory
needed in addition to the input that we consider read-only. What variables are
we actually writing? 2, we have u, we have b,
and we have num search. And all of those take log of number
of nodes, bits to represent. And what do we say log spaces, it's a constant number of
pointers into the input, right? But that's essentially
what u and v are. And then this num searched
takes space log of e is one. So we have only a constant number 10, so it takes o of log space. Okay, so now we're going to talk a little bit about why
is reachability so central to studying space
bounded computation. So if our non-deterministic
program uses space S and we want to use that
program to search a graph. Well, we can search graph of size
up to two to the s, Meaning. Right? Because you can store three, No, two nodes, u and v. And so that's enough to search
graphs with this many nodes. In other words, like, let's
say polynomial space, these are like internet size graphs. So let's flip this around now. Every non-deterministic
program in some sense is completely defined by its
configuration reachability graph. What does that graph? So this is the graph where V is the set of all configurations of the program at
the state of memory. If you're talking about
a Turing machine, that means configuration
by the normal definition, that's a Python program. It's all the memory
that you need to know, to know what to do Next. And you put an edge between two nodes if there's a transition
from one to the other. And note that if it's a
non-deterministic machine, you might have many edges
coming out of the represented. You can do more than
one thing, or sorry, coming out of you representing that you can do more than
one next step from you. But what you can do is completely
captured by that set of edges. Now, it's also no problem to assume that we only have a single
accepting configuration, right? If not, then just rewrite
your Turing machine, say so it erases all the
tapes before it halts. So that, you know, we did that. It would decide the same language and now all the accepting configuration
would look identical. Now, recall deterministic
programs have a line graph. There's always only one
next node you can go to. Nondeterministic is more general. Okay? So in fact, we can say that every problem in n space of S is equivalent
to a reachability problem. We want to know on input x, does the machine,
except if we're asking, well, is there a way, is there a sequence of
nondeterministic choices to reach the accept state? Well, that's the same thing as just asking in this configuration graph, if we assume there's only a
single accepting configuration. Once we know x, we
know what the start configuration c axes
and we're just asking, can we reach from CX day? They answer to that is the
answer to the question, does that Turing machine except x? So reachability, recall is solvable, say using depth-first search in time, big O of the number of nodes
plus the number of IT. So now we're going to
relate this to time. And since we're talking
here about we have space S. So the graph hat size up
to two to the s, right? Which bounds the time. Well, then that means that we need only time O
of 2 to the 0 of S, right? And no, we're saying here
that the number of edges, which in general graphs can be quadratically bigger than
the number of nodes. But not in this kind of graph because we only have 0, 1 out-degree. Because we assume that when we define our terms and
in fact it's out-degree two. If we just assume that you can make a single binary
non-deterministic choice. So this gives us a sort of reproof
of what we already observed, which is that any problems solvable in n space of S is solvable
in time two to the 0 of this. By solving reachability on the configuration reachability
graph of the space bounded machine, which gives these two corollaries. And L is contained in P, NP space is contained in x.