Next chapter that's
called memory paths in games is really about
memory or space complexity. But the idea of paths in graphs and two player games play such a central role that
it made it into the title. So we've been talking about
time complexity so far. And now we're going to talk
about space complexity. So what's the difference when
we think about these two? So we'll define a
little more formally, some complexity classes later. But right now informally, let's just say space is
the class of problems decidable with a polynomial
amount of memory. You know, same as with time. We measure the memory usage as a function of the number
of bits of input. And now the space usage has
the same units as the input. That's just number of bits used. Okay, so it's often said
the difference between time and space is that
you can reuse space, but you can't reuse time. Now this leads to some
unintuitive results. So first of all, unlike what we believed to be the case
with time complexity, we know in space complexity, non-determinism does not help that much only by maybe a polynomial, a factor with space
bounded computation. So P space is known to equal the nondeterministic
version of p space. And we also have that n space
of S equals colon space of S. In other words, if a language is decidable with a certain
amount of space, then so is its complement. Which again, is weird because it means proving that
something doesn't exist. It's just as easy as proving
that it does exist if you recall this difference
between what NP and co-NP. But some intuition still hold. So with more space, you can compute more. There's a space hierarchy
theorem that says, you know, you can compute more in
space AS than you can in space. Little of it as if time is bounded, space is also bounded. So whatever you can
compute with time t, You can also compute
with that much space. And if space is bounded, time is also bounded, but here they're not
the same background. Whatever you can do with space S, you can do with time, exponential ns. But we, you know, we
think maybe you do need more time than you need space. On the biggest open question here is, does space helped more than time? Or more formally,
does p equal P space? And we think the answer is no. And proving this is true that they're
unequal should be even easier than proving P
is not equal to NP. As we'll see in a bit, we
see the relationships. Okay? So how do we define space bounded
computation more formally? So the textbook, as
I've said and takes a somewhat informal approach
to some of these definitions. If we do think about terrain
machines, specifically, sub-linear time computation
is mostly uninteresting. For a Turing machine, two. Scan a bit of its input
that's near the end. It needs time linear in
the size of the input. Even if it doesn't care about
the bits in the middle, it takes time o of n Just
to advance the tape head. So sub-linear time computation generally doesn't make
a whole lot of sense. Now it is somewhat interesting
for random access machines that can jump immediately to some part of the input without reading
all the parts in between. So binary search is a logarithmic
time and computation, but only on a RAM machine. It doesn't make sense to
do it on a terrain should. Now sublinear space computation makes sense even on a Turing machine. So for example, you might
want to search the graph of all web pages on the internet. In fact, not just you might, many companies do want
to do this very thing. Google tries to do it continuously. And of course, you can't load
the whole input into memory. So it makes sense to think
about using an amount of space less than the total input
you're trying to process. Now the way we formalize
this with our formal models as we give our Turing machine
or a random access machine, whatever kind of model we're using. A read only input, but a read write
working memory, right? So for a Turing machine, these
would be two separate tapes, and only the latter is
counted as space usage. So the idea here is
to be able to talk about space being sub-linear. You need to restrict the
model so it can't write to the input and use it
for some of its space. Otherwise, that would, that should
count against that space usage. But you do want to let it read
any of the input at once. Just the working storage
is going to be small. And if we're talking
about Boolean output, we can be done there. Sometimes we want to talk about writing more output than
the allowed space usage. So for example, you know, if you want to talk about
arithmetic operations like multiplication being
done in sublinear space. Well, they write numbers just
as big as the ones they read. So To talk sensibly about not using very much space to do that
well yet to write the output, you can't make it read-only. So you make a write-only. Alright, so you can't read them or you can't write to the
input that you can read it. You can't read your output that you've written, that
you can write to it. So the input and output
are no use to you if you try to use them as
intermediate storage. And then you only count the space
used on your read write memory. Now the textbook sort of implicitly assumes RAM Random Access Memory. So essentially what this means is if you're given a
location like an address, an integer address into your memory, you can think of it like which position is it on
a Turing machine tape? Or you can just think about it
like a regular computer substance that has a linear memory, just like a Turing machine, you address it with a single integer. And once you're given
this memory location, once you've written it down, if you then try to read or write it, you assume that takes
one single step. Right now, note that only matters
if we also care about the time. And notice the size of your input
or your working memory is K. It's going to take log of k bits
to write an address into it.