Let's think a bit
now about time-bound versus space balance and how do these two inner
play in one computation? So first, an assumption of any reasonable model
we're going to make here is certainly true
of Turing machines, is that a program can allocate at most a constant number of
bits per time-step, right? So now sometimes you'll
have a single line of code like malloc that will appear to allocate whole bunch
of memory at once. But that's only gives you not see the operating system code
executing the dig down into it. On average, it, it might have to clear out that space for you to do. And if it's clearing out n bits
for you to use, then it's, it's going to require
O of n time to do that with this kind of more
straightforward with a Turing machine or what does
it mean to allocate memory? It just means you move your
tape head further right, than you've ever moved it before, but that only gets you
one more tape cell. So so with the definition of space
just be number of tape cells, it's clear that you
can't use more space on a Turing machine and then you have time available to move the tape. But we're just going
to assume that this is true of any of our models. And so that means whatever
is your space bound, it's gotta be less than your
time-bound, but within a constant. So stated in the set
theoretic notation, time of T is a subset of space of t. In other words, if you can
solve a problem in o of t time, you can also solve IT and OT space, just because that algorithm can't be used in more than OT
space when it runs. So in particular, P is
a subset of P space. Now, let's go the other way. Can we go from knowing how much space a computation uses to putting a
bound on how much time it uses. Well, if it uses all of
us and bits of memory, all right, So SME space, then it has at most two to the 0
of S and possible configurations that it could visit to
what the configuration. Well, again, this is where
Turing machines come in handy. Most of the, the bulk of counting how big that configuration
is is the tape content. You need to know what
state the Turing machine is where the tape that, but it's mostly in that string. That's the take content. And what's the length of that string? Well, the biggest it
gets is the space usage. That's the definition
of the space usage. So how many strings of
length 0 lesson can you add? Well, it's like, like
two to the 0 of S. And now you might
have a different base here than two if it's a
bigger tape alphabet, but again, the big O up here
would, would take care of that. So, okay, So it has at most exponentially more
configurations than ESA, them that I can run through. Now, imagine that ever repeats a configuration will
then it'll run forever. But in this chapter we're only
going to be focusing on deciders, on total programs that
halt and all their inputs. So conversely, if a program
halts on all its inputs, it can never repeat a configuration
or else it would run forever. So it must have at
most two to the o of n steps that it takes to the time is at most
exponential in the space. So we get this for general space
bounded complexity classes. Space of S, meaning using o of s in beds is contained in time
of two to though of S. In other words, if you can
solve a problem with OS space, you can solve it with
two to the o of n time. So in particular, that means
l is a subset of B space. Problem solvable with
logarithmic space necessarily take only polynomial time to
avoid repeating configurations. And similarly, any
polynomial space bounded computation is naturally going
to use at most exponential time. So that's time versus space. In the deterministic setting. We can think about
nondeterministic time as well, studied a lot and compare
that to deterministic space. So recall that n time of T is
contained in time of two to the 0 t. For example, NP is contained in x. This was our observation that you can solve problems in NP by exhaustive search all
the possible witnesses. That's the basis of
this kind of result. You to search over all
the possible witnesses using the verifier characterization or nondeterministic bets using the non-deterministic
computation variant. So here is that algorithm
and we analyze this. We showed it takes at
most two to the 0 t time. So let's take the same algorithm
and analyze its space complexity. So the length of the witness that your w that
you're passing into the verifier here is at most the amount of time
that the verifier uses, right? If it's actually
nontrivial to using its, its witness, then it's going
to run for a length of time, at least that so the witness length can't be too much bigger than T or I can't be any bigger than T and N.
And the space usage of the can't be any bigger than its time by the
same argument we gave before, which is that to allocate new memory, you need time, so you can't use
more space than you're using time. So putting those two together, we actually have that. If you can do something in non-deterministic time
t, naturally, you can. By applying this algorithm, this algorithm can
solve it in space OFT. So going to polynomial time, we get the NP is contained
in T space, right? Just this algorithm naturally
uses at most polynomial space. So putting all those together, these various complexity
class that we've looked at, we have whatever you can
do in logarithmic space, you can do in polynomial time. And if you can do that
deterministically, you can do it non-deterministically
in polynomial time. And if you can do that,
right, or in other words, you can verify in polynomial time. And and if you can verify
in polynomial time, you can search all the
possible witnesses and only polynomial space. And that naturally takes at most exponential time to avoid
repeating a configuration. If you can do that deterministically, you can do it non-deterministically
and, and so on. And that takes at most
exponential space. So we have these containment, some of them were not sure
whether their proper or not, but scanning farther out, we do know that getting from
P to X is a proper container. The time hierarchy
theorem says there's things solvable in exponential time, but not polynomial time. We also have a non-deterministic
variant of that. So getting from NP to NXP, you have to add some new problems. That's the non-deterministic
time hierarchy there. Now we won't prove it, but there
is a space hierarchy theorem. And even for Turing machines,
holds quite tightly. Where if S1 is little o of
s To write by any amount, then you can solve more
problems of space S2, s1, which means we can come
back up here and say L and P space and exponential space, three space classes up here are
each properly contained in Linux.