So with that definition
of space usage in mind, let's define our major space
bounded complexity classes. So space of S sub N is the space
counterpart of time of T of n. The class of problems solvable with Big-O of acid and
working memory, right? And we use this Big-O to
kind of brush aside or okay, Are we talking how many bits of memory or how many bytes of memory? You know, what exactly
is the tape alphabet if it's a Turing machine, the answer to those questions
doesn't matter if all you're concerned about is getting things within a
multiplicative constant. So we use a big, Oh, they're just like with time. And then the two major complexity classes we'll
focus on here that, that capture a class of
space bounds as we put here, is one is just called an L, and this is space of log of n. This is a confusing name. Every other space plasma use has the word space
somewhere in the title, except the ones related to L, where instead of saying
L space, it just says L. And I don't know why this is. It might be because logarithmic time doesn't make a lot of sense
on a Turing machines. So there's no need to have
separate l time and space classes. But at any rate, when you see L, it means space log of n, meaning O of log of n
space, not log squared. You don't allow exponent's here, just O of log of n, So login to login and
three login, etc. So intuitively, what is this class? Well, these are problems
where you can solve them and the only extra memory you need is to have a constant number of
pointers into your input. Like each pointer is going to
take log of n space to write down to address a certain location
and your input and read it. And this is, these are the problems, or you only need a constant
number of such points. So for example, if you're
processing a graph, you might want to search
the graph or do something. The problems, or you need
only o to store o of 1 nodes at a time and nothing else that these would
be logging space. And then of course there's
polynomial space because polynomial bounds again
are quite robust, been closed under
composition and everything. So this is the space
bounded counterpart of p. So let's see some examples of log-space and polynomial
space computation. So here's an example
somethin showing that logarithmic space isn't
that much of a restriction. They can do things say, finite state machines can't do. So it helps to have more than constant memory deciding
palindrome, right? So remember a palindrome is a string and that's equal to its own reverse, looks the same forward and backward. So here is some pseudocode for it. Or actually I guess this
is my duty Python code. So how can we tell if x
equals its own reverse? Well, we can set a pointer
I to the start of x, a pointer j to the end of X, and then move them towards
each other while I'm, while I is less than J, check XI and XJ if they're unequal. Oh, there's two spots that we want to know that the
first symbol equals the last, the second symbol equals
the second to last. The third symbol equals
the third to last. So we check those if you find
that unequal, return false, otherwise they move i up and J
down, and we get to the end. We didn't find a pair of
unequal ones, then we say true. So what's the space complexity? Well, we need log n bits
to store I starts at one, but it goes all the
way up to n If n is the length of x and when
he login bits for j. So we need a constant number
of pointers into art input I and j are both pointers and then
we can read them like this. Alright, so there's a logarithmic
space computable example. Here's a polynomial space example. Recall the definition
of cellular atomaton. When I drew them earlier, I drew time going down. Now time is going to the right. So a configuration would
be one column here. This would be at time 0,
at time 1, at time 2. This shows how this one-dimensional
cellular automaton evolves, starting at time 0,
going up to time and 63. And one thing you might
want to do is check if a given configuration is in a periodic orbit of a
cellular automaton. So you'll notice this
configuration repeats. So right in a counter-example would be one where it
eventually gets into an orbit, but that configuration happened
prior to the orbit, right? So for instance, if you
started here and then repeated this configuration and
then cycled within a year, none of these would be in the period. So here's a way to do it. In polynomial space. We have our cellular atomaton rule that CA and then our initial
configuration and knit, which is just some binary string and is going to be
the length of that. Now, of course, our total input
size would also include the rules, but we assume those are
constant size and we have a very big configuration. So we start exit the
initial configuration. We're going to repeatedly
update it by applying the rule. This is just some code for
applying the CA rules. So this is, I won't walk through
all of this to carefully, but we update it and then we just check is x equal to a net, right? So we're going to repeatedly
updated if we ever revisit and it was
an aperiodic orbit. Okay, So why does this need
only polynomial space? Well, at any given time, we're remembering in it, which takes space and an
x which takes space n. So that's two n plus this, you know, the space usage or update
year, but what does that do? Well, it just reads
three bits out of x. It uses AI to index into there, but that's only log of n bits. That's negligible compared
to the n bits to store x. And then, yeah, not too
much extra space here. So this is polynomial space, linear space it back. So the net x, y, and j are n-bits
H and an iss log evidence.