We're going to talk
about how to define non-deterministic space
bounded computation. Now the textbook goes through some prover verifier
formulations similar to the verification characterization
of NP that we talked about. Now, the key difference with nb is that even if
you're using only say, polynomial space or particularly,
especially log-space. But even with polynomial space, witnesses can be exponential length. For example, a common P
space type of problem would be finding a
check made in chess, or more generally, a
winning move in some game. And those could be
exponential length compared to the number of bits you need to represent one single
configuration of the game. So we don't have the polynomial space found on witness length anymore. Now, I think it's a bit
awkward actually to define non-deterministic
space that way. So I actually prefer the
non-deterministic program formulation, even though I don't
prefer it for time, For today's gone, I find
this easier to think about. So remember just the definition of a non-deterministic Turing
machine or algorithm, it can generate
non-deterministic bets, right? And we say that if the
correct answer is yes, we demand that some
computation path except for some choice of non-determinism
should cause it to accept. And if the correct answer is no, the no computation, pasture, etc. That's exactly as
we've been doing it. Now we just put an S
of n space bound on it and we get the class n space of S. So that's fairly straightforward compared to the other
kind of characterization. So we can define n, l is n space log n and n space is all the n polynomial
n spaces particular. So I prefer to think
about it that way, but there is approver verifier characterization similar
to NP hour or more generally, n time with t. So in this case
we have a verifier algorithm. We have an input x, which is an instance of the
problem we're talking about. And we say it's length is N. And we want the space bound of
this verifier to be S sub n. So, so far, it's normal and we
have a witness or a proof w, which is itself a string, so that, that's just like with NP. Now, here's the key difference. The length of w is arbitrary. It can be much bigger than the
space bound here, unlike NP, where it doesn't make sense
to have the witness length be longer than the time allowed or else he couldn't even
read the whole witness. But here the witness could be
much bigger than the space, so we can still read
the whole thing without ever you loading it all into
the read-write memory at once. Now, we demand that v has read-only access to both of its
inputs, both x and w. It can read them, but I can't right? Now here's where it gets technical. This is why I don't prefer this
characterization that these are technical things you have
to do to actually make this map onto the previous slide. It has random access to X so
it can jump anywhere in to x. I'm already say it's a Turing machine and
maybe it's not random access, but it can slide the tape head
back and forth like normal. It has only sequential
access to bits of w. And here's the key. You don't even have a tape
that can move left or right. It can only move from left
to right, kinda like a DFA. So you can choose when you want
to look at the next bit of w. But once you've done that,
you can never look at any previous bits that
you want to remember, any previous bits
you have to remember them in the read-write memory. And that can be much
smaller than W itself. So that is the technical
stuff that we have to add on. Now, from now on, it is just like the definition
of NP for this verifier. For us to say it works, we need that x is a yes instance. If and only if there's a witness
w that makes dx x XW accept. And notice I didn't
say there's a w in some set of strings of a certain way that could
be an arbitrary length W. Okay, so why is it that we make this strange requirements about access and limits of w in this way. Well, if we didn't
make this requirement, then I'm going to say we
could encode NP-complete problems using only
logarithmic space. Mating because we're not counting
the space of the witness, right? So if for instance the Hamiltonian path problem would be in L and we'd have n l equals np. I'm not going to go through
that here on the slide. But the way you would do it is
to argue that if you had read, write access to w or sorry, not really red, but if we had, if we could go back and forth
and read bits of w over again, we can actually execute the
hand path verifier on it. So I won't go through that now, but feel free to ask
about that if it's not clear how you would do that.