So remember that one
way we characterize NP is a language is an NP
means that for any string x, x is in the language
if and only if there is a W of polynomial length and x, such that the verifier VA, which is polynomial time, accepts x and w. And recall that this
was generalized to this whole polynomial hierarchy
where we can ask, okay, Given a verifier that
takes many witnesses, it takes the input x, but
also the W1, W2, et cetera. It can alternate the
quantifiers, they can ask, is there a w1 so that for all w two, there is a W3C For all
w four, et cetera. The accepts all of them. And again, they're all
polynomial length bounded. The verifier is still required
to be polynomial time. And up here we just had one witness. Now we alternate k times between witnesses that k is
just a constant, right? So the witnesses can be
length polynomial in x, but there's a constant
number of witnesses. It doesn't depend at
all. On x itself. There's a surprising
characterization. It turns out if we relax that and allow more than a
constant number of witnesses, we allow a polynomial number of
alternation between the witnesses. We exactly get polynomial space. This is very surprising and it was a very surprising to
me when I first heard this. So this is not at all obvious to me. And the proof is not obvious, but we have the tools to prove it now. So we're
going to go through that. All right, so the key idea
here is that based on x, you choose based on x, how many rounds of alternation
there's going to be. Okay, so how can we express right? And again, remember reachability, reachability problem
somehow characterizes the space founded complexity classes. So the key idea here is
going to be to express reachability with
logical quantifiers. So here's the desired
predicate we wanted to define. It is essentially the
reachability statement. And it's, takes three inputs, an S to T and a k, two nodes n, an integer bound k. And this
expresses there is a path in some, in this graph from S to
T of length at most k. So this is the predicate
we want to define. We want to define it using the logical quantifiers
exist and for all, as well as the other tools of Boolean logic like
negation and an or. Now our basic predicate, that's quote, obviously computable, but just by looking at the graph
and our input is called E of UV. And this expresses not quite. There's an edge from u to be, either there's an edge from u to v, or u is just equal to d. So this is the basic
predicate, our UV one, there's a path from u to
v of length, at most one, it's equal to one if
there's an edge and it's equal to 0 if they're
just the same node. So that's sort of obviously
it is computable. Now the goal is to use only
first order quantifiers. There's some technical
reasons for this, but what First-order means
when we're talking about graphs is that when
you write exist, you. The exists ranges over all nodes. You can't range over
all sets of note, this is like a technical
thing we're not going to get into mostly cuz I don't
totally understand it. But that would be the so-called
second-order quantifiers. If the exists, we're allowed to
range over all sets of nodes. Okay, so let's just
start by writing down the most obvious way to express
our STK using logical quantifiers. Well, it'll just be, you know, do a bunch of existence string a bunch of the basic
predicates together. So there's a path from S to
T of length at most k if and only if there exists these k
minus one intermediate nodes, which are the nodes you
go to along the path. So that there's an
edge from S to U one, there's an edge from U1, U2, from U2, U3, etcetera on to
UK minus one to t, right? And those all have to be true. So this expresses, this is always using the first
case that there's an edge, not that they're equal, which
would be wasteful here. So, okay, so that logically
expresses this predicate using only existential quantifiers and these ends between
the basic predicates. But it doesn't quite
get what we want. The quantified logical formula. We want to be size polynomial
in the input, right? That was the requirement
we set for ourselves. We're going to use grass that are exponentially larger than
the input because the graphs represent the computation graph
of an algorithm on that input, the algorithm space bounded, it can have a huge running times. In many nodes in this graph, k could be really large. But this is using up to all the
nodes in the graph possibly. So this doesn't work
exactly as written. Essentially this is
showing reachability is an NB using the whole path
from S to T is the witness. But this is not what we need to show. We need to show that no matter even up to this
exponential size graph, we can use a formula, the size and whose number of
alternations polynomial in the input. So here's an idea
for how to fix this. We use middle first search. This is savages there. So our SDK, there's a path from S
to T of length at most k. Well, remember this key observation That's true if and only if
there's a midpoint, you k over 2. So if there's a midpoint,
nerds as the UK, and we can get from S to U, K over 2 and at most cavities steps. And we can get from UK over two to
t and most Cambridge who steps, then that's equivalent
to we can get from S to T and at most k steps. And we can recurse on that. We could say, well, each of these can be
expressed by splitting them into a pair of predicates, each asking about a quarter path. And we could keep recursing
until we get down to this. And we would just have there
exists these nodes and these, oh, this is exactly what we
had in the slide before. So this recursion was a
good idea except when we boiled it down to
what would it turn and do once we expand out the recursion is just precisely the
thing we wrote before. There's an edge from S to U
one, there's an edge from U1, U2 and so on up from
UK minus one to t. So that didn't quite work because this could be way too long
as could be exponential. This k could be exponential
in the size of the input. So now, let's wait and observe
what's happening here. That exists. Shorthand for a long string of
wars to write there exists a u, so that's some predicate. Phi of u is true. That's the same thing as
saying Phi of u 1 is true, or phi of u two is true, or that it up to Phi of UN is true. If you wonder you enter
all the possible nodes, you could make it, right. That's, these are equivalent. And similarly for all is a shorthand
for a very long string of n. So for all u, Phi of u is true, is the same as saying, well, phi of u honest true, and Phi of u two is true and
on up to Phi of u n is true. So we can replace this
very long string of ends with a single for all. And in fact, the way we're
going to do is we won't need to replace a
long string of ends. We're just going to replace them
one at a time in the recursion, but it will avoid in the end
is very long string down here. So let's go back to the start again. Use this middle first search
idea and first say our SDK, which means there's a path from
S to T of length at most k. Let's use middle first
search and observe that, well, that's equivalent to
there is a midpoint U1, meaning there's a path from S to
U on of length at most k over 2. And there's a path from one to
t of length at most k over 2. But now let's replace
that end with a for all. It's a really trivial for all. It's like the easiest
for all There it is. It's only sort of searching over
two different possible variables. But what we're doing
is we're looking at, well, what are these two expressions
have in common the k over 2, but where are they different? They have a different pair. First inputs, here,
the first input is S, and you want, here are the
first two inputs, U1 and teeth. So we just replace
those with variables. And we say, well, this is equivalent to for all A1, B1 in this set, the set only has two things in S1, u1 and u and t r of A1B1, k over 2 is true. Okay? So we replace that
end with a for all. Okay? So now how can we recurse on this
expression rv A1B1 k over two? What should we write here? So pause and think about that. Well, this looks very much like
the first step we had here. We can again use the middle
first search idea and say, well, that's equivalent to there being
a midpoint between A1 and B1. But rather than writing
them at the end, we write it with the for all. So there's a midpoint, you too. So that for all A1, B1 in this set, A1 to A2 or U2 to B1 are of A2B2. K over four is true. Okay, So let's start the intuition starting to get a bit lost here, but just convince yourself
each step is equivalent. And when we're done, after we've gone down to log
of K levels of recursion, eggs are cutting cane
half every time. So we get down to
where we've got m of these alternation of
quantifiers exist for all A1, B1 air exists you to
for all A2V2 there. And we do this. M times n is only the log of k. So the size of this
formula is log of K. So it can handle an exponential size graph with only a polynomial size formula. So this is the key step to proving that reachability can be
characterized logically in this way. And because reachability
is a stand-in for a space bounded
complexity classes like, like P space that
shows P space can be characterized in this way
because the reachability on exponential size graphs is that the problem that
characterizes piece? So let's just conclude with
another way to think about this. Reachability has a game between
approver and a skeptic, and this'll come up later when
we talk about real games. So the prover says,
I claim that we can get from node to node T in k steps, like at most k steps by
going through midpoint yuan. And the skeptic says,
add, I believe you, how can you get firm has to
u1 and K over two steps. And the purposes as well
by going through YouTube. That's the midpoint
between those two. And the skeptic says, Oh yeah, how can you get from u two to u one and only k over four steps
if you choose the midpoint. Well, if I go into u3 and they
interact like this and at some point they reach
a pair of nodes Kept. This is really how can you get from U6 to you ate and just one step. And the prover says, Wow, there's just an edge,
follow the edge. The skeptic says, Okay, Yeah, you're right, but this is just
the middle of a bunch of claims. I'm skeptical about the backup
to use six to 13 into steps. So this multi-step sort of interactive proof is somehow
a generalization of NP. Np, there's one around, right? The prover gives you this witness and the verifier verifies, uh,
and, and they're just done. P spaces like that, except you can go
for polynomial and n many rounds of interaction this way.