So now we'll think about transforming non-deterministic
computations into deterministic ones. So simulating non-determinism
deterministically. Now recall we did this with
non-deterministic time, and it seems new and current
exponential time overhead. For example, NP is contained
in x because you can run all possible witnesses of
which there are exponentially many through the polynomial
time verification algorithm. And more generally, n time of T is contained and deterministic
time to, to the OT. And in general, we don't know
how to do any better with time. And we have good reasons to think you really can't do better than that. But we can provably do
much better with space and currying only a quadratic
simulation over. So this is what we call
salvage his theorem, which says that for any space
bound at least logarithmic, which is all the ones we
consider in this class. N space of S is contained
in space of S squared. So the corollary is that NP space
is actually equal to p space, which is why we never
talk about NP space. I'd certainly doesn't
deserve its own name. And another corollary is that NL, when we substitute S is log of n and l is contained in
space of log squared of N. So note that's polylogarithmic, but it's not logarithmic. Log square root of n is
not big O of log of n. And in fact, the space hierarchy
theorem tells us that L, which is space of log n, is not equal to space
of log square root of n. Log n is little o
of log squared of N. So there's things you can
do with this much space. You provably can't do
with this much space. So we still don't know
whether l equals n. Now, can we prove that L is actually contained in
an even smaller class? Well, we don't know. Okay, So, but we do know we can do this. So that's savages there. And so we can restate it as reachability is contained in
space of log squared of N, right? So this is, this is the entire
sort of point of the algorithm. And through the fact
that you can reduce all those space founded
computation's to reachability. You can get this to apply
to to others based classes. So kind of the, the most important cases captured by, by showing this. So recall that breadth-first search and depth-first search each
use linear memory, right? You don't think about
the memory usage much, but if you think about
how they both work, they both maintain a set
of nodes you've already visited to avoid visiting
the same node twice. So you have to store in your read write memory
all the visited nodes. They use linear memory. So they're legit search algorithms
and they run pretty fast there. They're linear time, but, but they use linear memory. How can we get that down to only
logs square root of n space? So salvage his algorithm, the textbook describes
as not breadth-first, not that first, but
middle first search. And what it does is it
visits each node repeatedly. It does not avoid visiting
the same node twice. It revisits a whole
bunch of nodes and in fact does it so often
it takes a lot of time, but it saves on space. So here's the key observation. Let S and T be two nodes and
then k be a positive integer. And we write S arrow Katie to denote there is a path of
length at most k from S to T. So that's what this notation means. We're going to use this repeatedly. There's a path from S to
T of length at most k. So here's an easy observation that there's a path from
S to T of length at most k if and only if there's
a middle point where you, where there's a path from S to
U of length at most half of K, and a path from u to t of
length at most half of K. So in other words, there is this path the squiggly thing represents maybe
there's many nodes along here. This is true if and only if
there's some you that you encounter halfway
through on that back. So this is going to be the key to the algorithm because it
gives us a way to recurse. And in particular,
note that we can apply that same statement to S and
U with K equals K over 2. So if there's a path
from S to U, well, there's a middle point, u1, midway between S and U. And if there's a path from u to t, then there's a middle point,
U2 midway between UAT. So this gives the basis
of the algorithm. And here it is in
Python ESC pseudocode. This is salvage his algorithm. We're given a graph G and S and T, and then we're given a bound k. We, when we called this at first, we just set K equal to the
number of nodes in the graph. So we want to know, is it possible to reach from
S to t using at most k nodes. So if k is one, what does that mean? Well, what does it mean to
have a path of length at most one I did as a
direct edge from S to T. Or the path could be length 0, that's length at most one. So S could just be equal to t. So if either of these is true, then we say, yes, there is a path of
length at most one. So that's the base case
and the recursive case. We do this search, we iterate
over every single node in you. And we ask, is it
possible to get from S to U and half as many steps as this end. Is it possible to get from u
to t and half as many steps? And if so, we return true. And if we don't find that
middle point, we return false. So by this observation, if we call this with K equal to the number of
nodes in the whole graph. It will eventually get
down to a base case and it will correctly identify
whether this path exists. So now we got to analyze
the space usage. So here's the same algorithm. I just rewrote it. Let's
call n the number of nodes. Now notice each level of recursion
has four variables, STU and k. And each of them are just indices into g or just a number that is at most n. So each of them takes at
most log of n bits to represent. So what we gotta do now is bound how many levels of
recursion are going to happen? Because that will bound for us
how big does the stack yet, meaning the call stack
as we recurse, right? We're going to have to remember the variables at each
level of recursion. We're going to bound
the depth of recursion. So we make the first call and
we call reachable of GST and n. And we're going to have log n
levels of recursion because they're cutting K and a half each
time and it starts at it. So what do we need? We have log n levels of recursion. And each level of recursion
takes O of log n bits. It's four times log n bits. So the total number of bits than
ever need to be stored at once, considering the entire
call stack is log squared of N log n levels times
log n bits per level. So that shows that reachability this recursive algorithm uses at
most log square root of n bits. Now recall that predicting whether a non-deterministic program
will accept using at most as in space is equivalent to reachability on a graph of
size two to the s at it. So this is an argument that, well, we weren't just talking about log-space and log
square root of n space. Here we're at, we're actually talking about every space found above there. Because that graph can actually be the computation graph of an
algorithm with a bigger space bound. Whatever that space bound is, two to that number is how many
nodes is in its reachability graph. By querying reachability
using savages algorithm, we can predict that. And so what that shows us
is that if we want to know, does that algorithm,
which is S space bounded, that does it except using at
most space bound S. We can solve that deterministically using salvage his algorithm on the graph
is in space of S square. So this actually applies to all
the bigger space bounds as well. So the open question is, is salvage his algorithm optimal? Right? Do we need this quadratic blowup? So here's some open questions. Is there a log to the
1.99 and space algorithm? I just log raised to any
power less than two. That's totally. And of course, a much
stronger connector is, is there a log n space
algorithm, right? If so, because reachability
is NL complete, that would imply that L
equals n. That would show reachability is n. Now this is not
as unbelievable as P equals NP. People are kinda sure about that.