So now we're going to prove that, unlike what we believe to be
the case with time complexity, when it comes to space complexity, proven that no witness exists is as easy in some sense as
proving that one does exist. I had to remember a
problem is an NP if a time efficiently checkable proof exists
whenever the answer is yes. For example, does a graph
have a Hamiltonian path? If it does the path as the prints. And this conjecture that end he
is not equal to co-NP expresses our intuition that there's
not a time efficiently checkable proof for
the lack of a witness. If a graph has no Hamiltonian path, we don't think that there's
a short proof I can give you that you can check
and be convinced 0. The graph really does
not have a Hamiltonian. So the so-called elements
shell up shen me theorem says that this intuition fails when it comes to
space bounded complexity. In fact, for any space
found S at least log n, n space of S equals Cohen spaces. So a corollary is that
n now equals Cohen oh, and also NPS phase
equals co-NP space. Although we already
knew both are equal to p space by savages there. So there's an obvious space
efficiently checkable proof when there is a path in a graph
from S to T. Remember, reachability is kind of the canonical NLP problems
and I'll complete and that there's an easy proof when there's a path that you could just check that each adjacent pair of nodes
is connected by an edge. But it turns out there's also a space efficiently
checkable proof when there's no path from S to T. So this is
sort of the surprising part. It's not obvious what that
proof should look like, but we're going to
show that one exists, although it's a bit more complicated. Okay, So the strategy for
showing us is going to be to show that non
reachability is in and out. So knowledge ability is just
the complement of reachability. It's the set of all
graphs and pairs of nodes that do not have a path from
the first node added a second. Okay, so let's just try to
connect these things up a bit. Now, since reachability
is NL complete, its complement, non
reachability is Cohen. So if we can show that non
reachability is a nano, this implies that because
it's in and now it's reducible to reachability
because reachability is NL complete everything
and then L is reducible. So this will mean non reachability
is reducible to reachability by wanting to many one
reductions that can't even flip the answer, right? That in turn will imply
that reachability is co NL complete because non
reachability is CO an album late, we've just shown it reduces
the reachability and that internal imply that non
reachability is NL, complete. Okay, so we'll get quite a bit out of just showing that non
reachability is an L will actually get both IT
and reachability are both complete for nl
and for CO and L. And through the, this idea that a complete property in a sense is a representative of all the
problems in that class. This is how it will show
that et al equals Coke. And remember, we wanted to show not just that those
two classes are equal, but all the space bounded, enclosed space bounded classes with even more than
logarithmic space. And that'll follow from this collapse
propagates upwards property. Remember the padding
technique that we used ones. So for example, if you,
if you want to show, say linear space
equals colinear space, using the fact that n
l equals CO. And I'll, well imagine taking any language
a and then computing pad of a, in this case paddle mean
on an input x pad it with k is zeros where k is exponentially
bigger than x and x is an a. So for every x in a, you're going to put the string
x semicolon 0 to the k in path. Not the fact that a is, it is decidable in
linear space implies that pad of a is decidable
in logarithmic space. Because you can just run the linear space algorithm on right on input x semicolon
and a bunch of zeros. Just run the linear space algorithm. On. If you want to know
is x and a are not. Then what you do is you pad
acts with all these zeros. Then you run this linear
space decider on a. But note that, that thing is taking only logarithmic space in
the length of x itself, because it's linear in x plus
these exponentially many zeros. And that ends phase. That's an L, which is CO et al, which means we have a coef
now algorithm for PAD. We want to determine is XNA. We let y equal this and we
use the colon l algorithm. At task is why in this
pad of a language. Now there's a technicality
which is that what we want to do this in log-space, but we can actually write on input x. We can't write this whole string, y equals x 0 to the
k in space X, right? But in the RAM model, we don't ever have to write it down when we run this algorithm on y, whatever it tries to
query a bit of Y. If next we have that in our
input, we just return it. And if the bit is beyond there, we just return a 0, right? So we just knows, and for
writing down only zeros, we don't have to
explicitly write them. We just feed them to the algorithm depending on its query location. Now, this is going to
take space O of log of y because that's a Cornell
algorithm, which is o of x. So that shows x's and
co-NP space of n. So we picked an arbitrary a and
n space n showed is in Coinbase. And by symmetry, right? So that means n space, n is contained in colon space. And by symmetry, we
can go the other way. Okay. So the goal is to show non
reachability is an NFL. So here's how we're,
we're kind of doing this sort of top down
approach from gotta, kinda giving you most of the proof except for the key part at the end. And then we'll do that
on the next slide. So the key is going to be this technique that both environment
and shout Chen independently. It's called inductive counting. So what do we have to do, right? Non reachability is we're given a graph and these
two nodes, S and T. And we want to know, is it the case that S is
not reachable from TEA? We want that if S is
not reachable from T, then there's some path to make our non-deterministic
log-space program say yes. And if S is reachable from TEA, that every path should
make it say no. So the main trick is going to be
this inductive counting where what we do is we actually do something a
little stronger than that. We count the total number of nodes reachable from S
and at most n steps, where n is the number of
nodes in the whole graph. So first step is count
that number are okay. Suppose we can do that. Supposedly could countless
number of nodes reachable. How can we use that to set up a non-deterministic computation
that indicates yes, if and only if t is
not reachable from S. So once you got this
number r in hand, we will sequentially guess
paths of length at most n ending in different nodes
like our different packets. And we're going to accept as long
as none of the paths ends in T. And note that these paths
can be checked storied only 0, 1 nodes at a time. So we can do is we
sequentially guess each pack. How do we guess one path? We sequentially guess, guess nodes at most n different
nodes and we just check, okay, is each, this is the standard
NL reachability algorithm. We just check. Is each new
node we've guess fall of, connected the previous ON by an edge. We non-deterministically, non-deterministically
guess how far to go. It's going to be some
number at most n. And then when we get to the end, and we want to know
what no, does it end? And we actually want to
make sure that these are different pads all end
in different nodes. So that's a little
bit of a tricky part. How do we ensure they end in
different nodes are here, could be like as big as n, right? So we can't just remember all the ending nodes that we've had because that would
take too much space, would take at least linear space. So we can't remember them all, but there's a few little technicality
tricks we can play here. We can count the number of
different end nodes we've seen. We can remember what was
the previous node we saw. And we can ensure that we're only going through n nodes in
order lexicographically. So actually we're going to
sequentially guess pads and we're going to check a
swap stronger condition, which is that these paths each
end and a different node. But if you would look at
the n nodes in order, they would appear in increasing
order of their identifier, right? Of each of them is just
represented by a bit spirit. And you can convince yourself
there are different paths. There's a way to get them in
the right order and checklists. So all we need to do is
just check that we never go down when we get, when we see a new. And so this is the
entire algorithm, right? A lot of guessing here, but this will verify that there is no path if
we get this number right, if you properly figured out
what is the number of nodes reachable than simply iterating
over many guest and nodes, we can verify none of them are T. So how do we compute how many nodes are reachable
from S in at most n steps. So here this is going
to be the trend. It's called inductive counting. And it's, this also uses
a bit of non-determinism. Again, this is a non-determinism
deterministic algorithm, so we're allowed to do that. But now we're not doing
a yes, no answer. We're doing a computation
of an integer. So what exactly do I
mean that we're going to output this number of
nodes non-deterministically. So it'll mean that the program, it makes guesses and
they can have errors, but it'll detect the errors, right? So what it cannot do is
make an error of the form. It outputs the wrong number. When I say you can have an error, what I mean is it will know
and error has been discovered. So it'll either just say worn
in like something went wrong. My, my output is an exception. But if there's no error, we're going to guarantee that
the integer returns is OK. It's actually the number
of nodes reachable from S. And at most that many
steps, I actually wouldn't. It will now express it as, more generally as k steps. So we're when we call this, we would call it within, but it's inductive, so we need to
allow that k could be less than. So this is the algorithm for inductively counting the
number of nodes that are k plus 1 reachable from
notice any unreachable and a path of length
k plus one or small. So it's inductive because
the first step is we, we do induction in the
base case that k is 0. We just say one, there's one node reachable
from S with paths of length 0, it's just S itself. That's it. And if k is bigger than 0, we do induction and we inductively
count how many nodes there are. And again, if we assuming this
is inductively fulfilled, if this returns a value at all, if this doesn't just
crash and say no, we had an error, RK will
actually be correct. To now we have to ensure
that there's a sequence of guesses that makes us return
the proper value of r k plus one. And that any other
sequence of guesses actually just reaches this
error line right here. So that if we return an integer,
it's the correct editor. But how do we do this? Well, let's ignore some
of the details in here. What we're gonna do is
iterate over each node will start assuming that
it's not reachable. And we discovered through this stuff we did in here
that it is reachable. We'll increment our k plus
one, so it starts at 0. And what we're gonna do
is try to figure out is V one of the nodes reachable and
at most k plus 1 steps if so, increment our k plus 1. So maybe it is, and we do this, maybe
it's not and we, it's V reachable is false, or maybe we just guessed wrong
and reach an error, right? So how is it that we
determined is V reachable? Well, what we're going
to do now is we're going to iterate over
each other node. We're going to use the
fact that we inductively counted and that our K is correct. And this will help us check whether our guesses in here are erroneous. So we'll iterate over
each possible node. And we'll use the standard ML
algorithm for k reachability to ask, is it possible in g to reach
from S to U and at most k steps. And remember, this
is an ML algorithm. It's non-deterministic, so this
will return true or false. If it returns false, don't know, was S reachable from the, could we reach from S to U? If it returns true, it's definitely true, right? So if this returns true, okay, Definitely it found a path
from S to U at checked it, so we can increment CK safely. And then that just tells us, okay, some other node u is
reachable in k steps. So now we check, well, is, is there an edge from u to v? That means v is reachable
and k plus 1 steps, or as u equal to v, either of those would
mean v is reachable in at most k plus 1 step. So we would say, great, we found a witness you
that, that v is reachable. It's one that's reachable in
one fewer step connected. So now what could go wrong here
is that some of the use could be reachable and then we want to
increment the CK, but we don't. But what's going to happen? Well, that means when we get
to the end of this loop, we will not have
discovered every node reachable in k or fewer steps. So CK, it will be too small. So that means CK will
be unequal to RK inductively assuming that our K is
accurate and we raise an error. So this is the trick with
inductive counting disease. Start with inductively
knowing how many there are. And then you use that to check, did you properly guess when
calling reachable right here. And this actually ensures if you manage to make it pass this error, This thing was guaranteed
to have guessed correct path of length at most k, which means you will have
discovered all the paths of length k plus one that could
have included B. Alright, so if you actually
managed to make it here, you really will have discovered
whether B is reachable. You'll increment our k plus 1. And so we make it
here without hidden, there are k plus one
is actually correct. Okay, So now a little
exercise at home. Why is this algorithm log-space? So I'll let you think
about that yourself. You can ask in the lecture
if it's not clear.