Before we move on from P space, completeness here, I do want to
mention that there's this result. Unfortunately, we don't
really have time to get into it's proven in Chapter 11. But we can get a little bit of a hint of what it says Given
what we studied just now. And it's that piece Bayes
equals this class IP, which stands for interactive proofs. So I want to talk just
a little bit about it. So, okay, Let's think about Q SAT, which is P space complete. So it's somehow is a stand
in for NAEP space problem. All of them are reducible to this, meaning every single polynomial
space Turing machine. You're going to
replace the statement. It accepts a certain string with
a quantified formula like this. So suppose that quantified
formula is false. Okay, So this is false. So it means you put a not in front
of them by De Morgan's laws, the past the not through here, all the way down to negate the fee and it switches exist and for all, so that becomes a for all X one and an exists x two and then
you have a negation error. So what that's saying
is that we think about the prover is trying to give, It's, the verifier is coming
back with other bits. For this to be false since you've
swapped for all and exists, it means that for any bit
the prover chooses for x1, there's a bit the verifier
can choose for x two so that no matter what the
prover chooses for X3, there's a bit the verifier
can choose for X4 and so on. To get down to making fee false, the verifier can cause
fee to be false. In other words, the verifier
has a winning strategy. Now, let's think a bit about how much computational power does the verifier need for this
winning strategy, right? If you're playing this game, you're given this formula phi
and you're now playing the game. How much computation you
have to do as the verifier, supposing that you have a
winning strategy to actually figure out which bit
should you choose for x2, which bit should you
choose for x four based on the bits that
have been chosen so far. But pause and think about that. Well, essentially you need a
polynomial space algorithm. I mean, you have to be
able to see ahead to see well for all possible things
that the prover might do, what should you do in response? You can do it in
polynomial space and in some sense you use or
need polynomial space. So interact. So this looks something
like an interactive proof. The prover is trying to prove
something to you interactively. But if they're lying, you want
to catch them in it, right? So this would be this
edge when you're using the situation where you can
catch them in their life. So interactive proof systems are
something very much like this, but with a key difference
that the verifier, instead of being allowed polynomial space is only
allowed polynomial time. And wrote recall polynomial
space algorithms can take exponential time. So it's only polynomial time, but it is allowed to be randomized. In other words, the system remains
equally powerful even if we downgrade the computational power of the verifier from polynomial
space to polynomial time. But we give it a random
number generator. And it turns out the prover needs
to be peace based, powerful. In either case. A related question would be, what if he didn't have
this interaction? What if you just allowed
the randomized part? Well, that defines another class. We unfortunately don't have time to study this quarter,
but it's called BPP. And this is the sort of
randomized variant of P. And in fact, most people think
it's actually equal to b.