en-ECS 220 9a_1-8.6 IP=PSPACE (no proof).txt

Before we move on from P space, completeness here, I do want to
mention that there's this result. Unfortunately, we don't
really have time to get into it's proven in Chapter 11. But we can get a little bit of a hint of what it says Given
what we studied just now. And it's that piece Bayes
equals this class IP, which stands for interactive proofs. So I want to talk just
a little bit about it. So, okay, Let's think about Q SAT, which is P space complete. So it's somehow is a stand
in for NAEP space problem. All of them are reducible to this, meaning every single polynomial
space Turing machine. You're going to
replace the statement. It accepts a certain string with
a quantified formula like this. So suppose that quantified
formula is false. Okay, So this is false. So it means you put a not in front
of them by De Morgan's laws, the past the not through here, all the way down to negate the fee and it switches exist and for all, so that becomes a for all X one and an exists x two and then
you have a negation error. So what that's saying
is that we think about the prover is trying to give, It's, the verifier is coming
back with other bits. For this to be false since you've
swapped for all and exists, it means that for any bit
the prover chooses for x1, there's a bit the verifier
can choose for x two so that no matter what the
prover chooses for X3, there's a bit the verifier
can choose for X4 and so on. To get down to making fee false, the verifier can cause
fee to be false. In other words, the verifier
has a winning strategy. Now, let's think a bit about how much computational power does the verifier need for this
winning strategy, right? If you're playing this game, you're given this formula phi
and you're now playing the game. How much computation you
have to do as the verifier, supposing that you have a
winning strategy to actually figure out which bit
should you choose for x2, which bit should you
choose for x four based on the bits that
have been chosen so far. But pause and think about that. Well, essentially you need a
polynomial space algorithm. I mean, you have to be
able to see ahead to see well for all possible things
that the prover might do, what should you do in response? You can do it in
polynomial space and in some sense you use or
need polynomial space. So interact. So this looks something
like an interactive proof. The prover is trying to prove
something to you interactively. But if they're lying, you want
to catch them in it, right? So this would be this
edge when you're using the situation where you can
catch them in their life. So interactive proof systems are
something very much like this, but with a key difference
that the verifier, instead of being allowed polynomial space is only
allowed polynomial time. And wrote recall polynomial
space algorithms can take exponential time. So it's only polynomial time, but it is allowed to be randomized. In other words, the system remains
equally powerful even if we downgrade the computational power of the verifier from polynomial
space to polynomial time. But we give it a random
number generator. And it turns out the prover needs
to be peace based, powerful. In either case. A related question would be, what if he didn't have
this interaction? What if you just allowed
the randomized part? Well, that defines another class. We unfortunately don't have time to study this quarter,
but it's called BPP. And this is the sort of
randomized variant of P. And in fact, most people think
it's actually equal to b.-e 

en-ECS 220 9a_2-8.5 Geography game.txt

Now we'll see how this alternating quantifier characterization
of P space. And, you know, one way you
can think of that is that Q SAT is somehow the cleanest way to capture the notion of alternating quantifiers
and it's P space complete. We'll see how this directly
corresponds to the idea of games being peace, face conflict. So here's a game called Geography, and this is something some kids, sometimes we'll play in
a car on a road trip. And the way the game works
is Player One names a city, any city, so say Paris, and then Paris ends with an S. And now Player 2 has got a name, a city that starts within us. So maybe Player two
names, Sacramento. Sacramento ends with a 0. So Player three have Parrot, sorry, Player 1 now has to name a
city that starts with an a. So maybe the name Omaha. And then plate, it's
now back to player two. They have to name a city
that starts with an a, maybe they named Albuquerque. So we can sort of formalize this as being more general than
just being about city names. We can say we have an arbitrary
directed graph where in the game the nodes or the city names have
an edge from one node to another. If the last character of u equals the first
character of a, sudden. Here might be part of the graph
of city names in this case. But just imagine you have
an arbitrary graph, right? It doesn't necessarily
correspond to letters and words. So the idea is players alternate moving along an
edge to an unvisited node. So what I forgot to
say is that you lose the game if you rename them. If you can't name a city
or if you rename a city, somebody has already
said, you can't reuse it. So players move along an
edge to an unvisited node. And the losers, the first
who cannot make a move. And maybe in the game
you lose because you, you just forget cities, but imagine you had a perfect memory. You still might lose because
you might run out of nodes. There may be no OUT neighbors of the previous move that,
that you're going moved. So the geography decision
problem is given a directed graph G and a
starting node B and two players are going to play this game. The question is, does Player one have a winning strategy starting at B? So can they play cleverly enough and they can
be guaranteed to be Player 2. So the first thing to
convince yourself as geography is contained in P space. We're given this graph. And we can run a possibly
exponential time algorithm, but a polynomial space algorithm to determine whether Player
One is when instead. So we won't talk about that here, but ask about that if it's not clear. Okay, so more interesting is
that geography is actually p space complete and
it's P space hard. And the way we can show
that is by reducing Q SAT to this is generally amaz P
space completeness proofs go, you reduce Q SAT to the problem. So we didn't define it this way. But let's assume that Q SAT
uses three CNF formulas. We let it be defined
with general formulas, but you could do tricks like an Cook 11 theorem to convert
those formulas to 3-CNF. So let's assume that we actually have three CNF formulas which
are easier to work with. So the question is how to evaluate a quantified 3 CNF
formula using geography. And the key idea is going
to use the nodes you've already visited to lock in
a choice for variables. So here's an example of
showing that the construction, hopefully in a general
enough way you can imagine what the graph would look like if you had more
clauses and more variable. So you have a node up here, you have one node down
here for every clause, and you have two nodes down
here for every variable. And the arrows here represent
which literals appear in each. And then with these little
gadgets down here as well. And we're going to mark with an
hex nodes we've already visited. So let's imagine we have a
red player and a blue player. And we start at the start node here, and the red player is
the first to move. So they make a mark, an X on one of the, our
neighbors of start. So they got either go to this node or this node is
the only two available. So let's imagine that
they mark this one. This is how they can choose
to set x equal to 1. Right? So if, if player, if the red player wants
to set x equal to 1, they move to the x node, not to the negation of x2. And then now notice there's only one edge out of this node and
only one edge out of that one. So in some sense that fixes
the next two minutes. All, all blue can do is move to this node and all red can
do is move to this node. So after reds middle, we do two moves and now it's
Blues turns out, blues turned. All right. And so blue can pick
to set y either to true or false. Remember that the way we
characterize Q SAT as two players, that are the players take turns
setting the beds one by one. This is how you can enforce
that within a graph. So blue, it's blue's turn. They only have to know
that they can move to, maybe they want to set y
to one. So they do that. We mark this as blue as before. The next two moves are fixed. Red goes here, blue goes here, and now red gets to pick. Maybe read wants to set z to 0. So redwood moving. Now, next two moves are fixed. Blue has to go here. Read has to go here. Now what's going on? Well now, blue can pick a clause. So we're setting this up. So read wants to make the whole formula true. Blue wants to make it false. So if blue is going to win, right, It would mean it's possible
to make the formula falls, but it's a CNF formula. Meaning if it's false, that's false because one of the clauses as false, which means blue would
be able to pick a clause now to that is false
under this assignment. But actually blue cat. So
no matter what Blue pick, suppose blue picks the left clause, will read, can go now
but work and read go. Read can go. Wherever. There's an unvisited nodes. X has been deserved
why husband visited, but Z has not been visited. So red can go there. Okay, So, so what's happening here? The blue player to start, the blue player lost. And more generally, what's
happening is that it's possible for red to choose a node so that no matter what
node blue chooses, red can choose a nodes that no
matter what cause blue chooses. Red can trap it and satisfy blue.-e 

en-ECS 220 9b_8.5 Immerman-Szelepcsényi Theorem NSPACE(s(n)) = coNSPACE(s(n)) for s(n) ≥ log(n).txt

So now we're going to prove that, unlike what we believe to be
the case with time complexity, when it comes to space complexity, proven that no witness exists is as easy in some sense as
proving that one does exist. I had to remember a
problem is an NP if a time efficiently checkable proof exists
whenever the answer is yes. For example, does a graph
have a Hamiltonian path? If it does the path as the prints. And this conjecture that end he
is not equal to co-NP expresses our intuition that there's
not a time efficiently checkable proof for
the lack of a witness. If a graph has no Hamiltonian path, we don't think that there's
a short proof I can give you that you can check
and be convinced 0. The graph really does
not have a Hamiltonian. So the so-called elements
shell up shen me theorem says that this intuition fails when it comes to
space bounded complexity. In fact, for any space
found S at least log n, n space of S equals Cohen spaces. So a corollary is that
n now equals Cohen oh, and also NPS phase
equals co-NP space. Although we already
knew both are equal to p space by savages there. So there's an obvious space
efficiently checkable proof when there is a path in a graph
from S to T. Remember, reachability is kind of the canonical NLP problems
and I'll complete and that there's an easy proof when there's a path that you could just check that each adjacent pair of nodes
is connected by an edge. But it turns out there's also a space efficiently
checkable proof when there's no path from S to T. So this is
sort of the surprising part. It's not obvious what that
proof should look like, but we're going to
show that one exists, although it's a bit more complicated. Okay, So the strategy for
showing us is going to be to show that non
reachability is in and out. So knowledge ability is just
the complement of reachability. It's the set of all
graphs and pairs of nodes that do not have a path from
the first node added a second. Okay, so let's just try to
connect these things up a bit. Now, since reachability
is NL complete, its complement, non
reachability is Cohen. So if we can show that non
reachability is a nano, this implies that because
it's in and now it's reducible to reachability
because reachability is NL complete everything
and then L is reducible. So this will mean non reachability
is reducible to reachability by wanting to many one
reductions that can't even flip the answer, right? That in turn will imply
that reachability is co NL complete because non
reachability is CO an album late, we've just shown it reduces
the reachability and that internal imply that non
reachability is NL, complete. Okay, so we'll get quite a bit out of just showing that non
reachability is an L will actually get both IT
and reachability are both complete for nl
and for CO and L. And through the, this idea that a complete property in a sense is a representative of all the
problems in that class. This is how it will show
that et al equals Coke. And remember, we wanted to show not just that those
two classes are equal, but all the space bounded, enclosed space bounded classes with even more than
logarithmic space. And that'll follow from this collapse
propagates upwards property. Remember the padding
technique that we used ones. So for example, if you,
if you want to show, say linear space
equals colinear space, using the fact that n
l equals CO. And I'll, well imagine taking any language
a and then computing pad of a, in this case paddle mean
on an input x pad it with k is zeros where k is exponentially
bigger than x and x is an a. So for every x in a, you're going to put the string
x semicolon 0 to the k in path. Not the fact that a is, it is decidable in
linear space implies that pad of a is decidable
in logarithmic space. Because you can just run the linear space algorithm on right on input x semicolon
and a bunch of zeros. Just run the linear space algorithm. On. If you want to know
is x and a are not. Then what you do is you pad
acts with all these zeros. Then you run this linear
space decider on a. But note that, that thing is taking only logarithmic space in
the length of x itself, because it's linear in x plus
these exponentially many zeros. And that ends phase. That's an L, which is CO et al, which means we have a coef
now algorithm for PAD. We want to determine is XNA. We let y equal this and we
use the colon l algorithm. At task is why in this
pad of a language. Now there's a technicality
which is that what we want to do this in log-space, but we can actually write on input x. We can't write this whole string, y equals x 0 to the
k in space X, right? But in the RAM model, we don't ever have to write it down when we run this algorithm on y, whatever it tries to
query a bit of Y. If next we have that in our
input, we just return it. And if the bit is beyond there, we just return a 0, right? So we just knows, and for
writing down only zeros, we don't have to
explicitly write them. We just feed them to the algorithm depending on its query location. Now, this is going to
take space O of log of y because that's a Cornell
algorithm, which is o of x. So that shows x's and
co-NP space of n. So we picked an arbitrary a and
n space n showed is in Coinbase. And by symmetry, right? So that means n space, n is contained in colon space. And by symmetry, we
can go the other way. Okay. So the goal is to show non
reachability is an NFL. So here's how we're,
we're kind of doing this sort of top down
approach from gotta, kinda giving you most of the proof except for the key part at the end. And then we'll do that
on the next slide. So the key is going to be this technique that both environment
and shout Chen independently. It's called inductive counting. So what do we have to do, right? Non reachability is we're given a graph and these
two nodes, S and T. And we want to know, is it the case that S is
not reachable from TEA? We want that if S is
not reachable from T, then there's some path to make our non-deterministic
log-space program say yes. And if S is reachable from TEA, that every path should
make it say no. So the main trick is going to be
this inductive counting where what we do is we actually do something a
little stronger than that. We count the total number of nodes reachable from S
and at most n steps, where n is the number of
nodes in the whole graph. So first step is count
that number are okay. Suppose we can do that. Supposedly could countless
number of nodes reachable. How can we use that to set up a non-deterministic computation
that indicates yes, if and only if t is
not reachable from S. So once you got this
number r in hand, we will sequentially guess
paths of length at most n ending in different nodes
like our different packets. And we're going to accept as long
as none of the paths ends in T. And note that these paths
can be checked storied only 0, 1 nodes at a time. So we can do is we
sequentially guess each pack. How do we guess one path? We sequentially guess, guess nodes at most n different
nodes and we just check, okay, is each, this is the standard
NL reachability algorithm. We just check. Is each new
node we've guess fall of, connected the previous ON by an edge. We non-deterministically, non-deterministically
guess how far to go. It's going to be some
number at most n. And then when we get to the end, and we want to know
what no, does it end? And we actually want to
make sure that these are different pads all end
in different nodes. So that's a little
bit of a tricky part. How do we ensure they end in
different nodes are here, could be like as big as n, right? So we can't just remember all the ending nodes that we've had because that would
take too much space, would take at least linear space. So we can't remember them all, but there's a few little technicality
tricks we can play here. We can count the number of
different end nodes we've seen. We can remember what was
the previous node we saw. And we can ensure that we're only going through n nodes in
order lexicographically. So actually we're going to
sequentially guess pads and we're going to check a
swap stronger condition, which is that these paths each
end and a different node. But if you would look at
the n nodes in order, they would appear in increasing
order of their identifier, right? Of each of them is just
represented by a bit spirit. And you can convince yourself
there are different paths. There's a way to get them in
the right order and checklists. So all we need to do is
just check that we never go down when we get, when we see a new. And so this is the
entire algorithm, right? A lot of guessing here, but this will verify that there is no path if
we get this number right, if you properly figured out
what is the number of nodes reachable than simply iterating
over many guest and nodes, we can verify none of them are T. So how do we compute how many nodes are reachable
from S in at most n steps. So here this is going
to be the trend. It's called inductive counting. And it's, this also uses
a bit of non-determinism. Again, this is a non-determinism
deterministic algorithm, so we're allowed to do that. But now we're not doing
a yes, no answer. We're doing a computation
of an integer. So what exactly do I
mean that we're going to output this number of
nodes non-deterministically. So it'll mean that the program, it makes guesses and
they can have errors, but it'll detect the errors, right? So what it cannot do is
make an error of the form. It outputs the wrong number. When I say you can have an error, what I mean is it will know
and error has been discovered. So it'll either just say worn
in like something went wrong. My, my output is an exception. But if there's no error, we're going to guarantee that
the integer returns is OK. It's actually the number
of nodes reachable from S. And at most that many
steps, I actually wouldn't. It will now express it as, more generally as k steps. So we're when we call this, we would call it within, but it's inductive, so we need to
allow that k could be less than. So this is the algorithm for inductively counting the
number of nodes that are k plus 1 reachable from
notice any unreachable and a path of length
k plus one or small. So it's inductive because
the first step is we, we do induction in the
base case that k is 0. We just say one, there's one node reachable
from S with paths of length 0, it's just S itself. That's it. And if k is bigger than 0, we do induction and we inductively
count how many nodes there are. And again, if we assuming this
is inductively fulfilled, if this returns a value at all, if this doesn't just
crash and say no, we had an error, RK will
actually be correct. To now we have to ensure
that there's a sequence of guesses that makes us return
the proper value of r k plus one. And that any other
sequence of guesses actually just reaches this
error line right here. So that if we return an integer,
it's the correct editor. But how do we do this? Well, let's ignore some
of the details in here. What we're gonna do is
iterate over each node will start assuming that
it's not reachable. And we discovered through this stuff we did in here
that it is reachable. We'll increment our k plus
one, so it starts at 0. And what we're gonna do
is try to figure out is V one of the nodes reachable and
at most k plus 1 steps if so, increment our k plus 1. So maybe it is, and we do this, maybe
it's not and we, it's V reachable is false, or maybe we just guessed wrong
and reach an error, right? So how is it that we
determined is V reachable? Well, what we're going
to do now is we're going to iterate over
each other node. We're going to use the
fact that we inductively counted and that our K is correct. And this will help us check whether our guesses in here are erroneous. So we'll iterate over
each possible node. And we'll use the standard ML
algorithm for k reachability to ask, is it possible in g to reach
from S to U and at most k steps. And remember, this
is an ML algorithm. It's non-deterministic, so this
will return true or false. If it returns false, don't know, was S reachable from the, could we reach from S to U? If it returns true, it's definitely true, right? So if this returns true, okay, Definitely it found a path
from S to U at checked it, so we can increment CK safely. And then that just tells us, okay, some other node u is
reachable in k steps. So now we check, well, is, is there an edge from u to v? That means v is reachable
and k plus 1 steps, or as u equal to v, either of those would
mean v is reachable in at most k plus 1 step. So we would say, great, we found a witness you
that, that v is reachable. It's one that's reachable in
one fewer step connected. So now what could go wrong here
is that some of the use could be reachable and then we want to
increment the CK, but we don't. But what's going to happen? Well, that means when we get
to the end of this loop, we will not have
discovered every node reachable in k or fewer steps. So CK, it will be too small. So that means CK will
be unequal to RK inductively assuming that our K is
accurate and we raise an error. So this is the trick with
inductive counting disease. Start with inductively
knowing how many there are. And then you use that to check, did you properly guess when
calling reachable right here. And this actually ensures if you manage to make it pass this error, This thing was guaranteed
to have guessed correct path of length at most k, which means you will have
discovered all the paths of length k plus one that could
have included B. Alright, so if you actually
managed to make it here, you really will have discovered
whether B is reachable. You'll increment our k plus 1. And so we make it
here without hidden, there are k plus one
is actually correct. Okay, So now a little
exercise at home. Why is this algorithm log-space? So I'll let you think
about that yourself. You can ask in the lecture
if it's not clear.-e 

