ECS 261: Program Verification - Winter Quarter 2026
Contents

    Welcome and Course Information
    Lectures
    Course Description
    Schedule
    Grade Breakdown
    Policies
    Contact and Office Hours

Welcome and Course Information

Welcome to ECS 261!

    Instructor: Caleb Stanford
    TA: Lucas Du
    CRN: 41072
    Units: 4
    Lectures: Tuesdays and Thursdays, 4:40-6pm in Olson Hall 146
    Final exam: Friday, March 20, 6-8pm. Please note that this is not in schedulebuilder! But it is the correct time for our class slot. If there are any unexpected changes to the schedule, then we will do the final exam in class.
    Piazza for class Q+A, announcements, and office hours

Lectures

I often lecture via live coding. I will post the code and lecture materials in this repository. To follow along with the lectures, clone the repository:

git clone git@github.com:DavisPL-Teaching/261.git

If you make changes to the code after each lecture, you will need to discard them before pulling again. For example, you can run:

git stash
git pull

Lecture Recordings and Zoom

All lectures are broadcast and recorded on Zoom, and the recordings are made available on Canvas. Please note that this is a best-effort process, technical difficulties do occur occasionally (such as lost video recordings or poor audio quality). If you miss class, you can make up the lectures and class polls by viewing the recording at any time prior to the last day of class.
Course Description

Introduction to the formal verification of software. Topics include a survey on tools and techniques, including: writing specifications, difference between testing and verification, first-order logic, Hoare logic, program safety properties and termination, automated verification tools including SMT solvers, and advanced topics such as advanced type systems, dynamic logic, and symbolic execution. Students will gain hands-on experience with writing program specifications using tools used in industry at companies like Amazon and Microsoft. Tools covered will include Z3 (via its Python API) and Dafny. This course can be considered as a graduate version of ECS 189C.
Prerequisites

Some prior background in mathematical reasoning (writing proofs, e.g. ECS 20 or ECS 120) at the undergraduate level is required. A course in formal logic (e.g., Phil 112 or its equivalent) is also helpful, but not required. As a graduate course, homeworks are a combination of tool-based work and theory (writing proofs), and there is a project component. You may ignore the prerequisite listed on the department website.

This course is appropriate for graduate students or advanced undergraduates. Please note if you have taken 189C, there will be a substantial overlap of material and some homeworks.
Textbook

The following textbook is optional but recommended:

    Program Proofs. K. Rustan M. Leino, MIT Press, 2023.

Learning Objectives

By the end of the course, students will be able to:

    Understand the concept of software verification and its importance.
    Understand and apply automated verification tools like Z3 for software analysis and logical reasoning tasks.
    Understand and use dedicated verification tools such as Dafny to develop formally verified software.
    Understand the logical underpinnings of verification tools, and program logics for program reasoning.

Schedule

See schedule.md.
Grade Breakdown

Your grade is evaluated based on:

    Participation (10%): via in-class polls
    Homeworks (10%): about 4 problem sets planned, plus homework 0
    Final Exam (40%): I am planning to do one final exam, either in-class or during finals period
    Project (40%): Project applying the concepts in the class to verification of a real-world software project of your choosing, including a project proposal and presentation

Attendance and Participation

To encourage class attendance, there are in-class polls that are worth a small amount of credit. If you miss class, you may make up the polls at any time (up to and including the last day of class) by watching the lectures and filling out your responses offline. Please note that your poll scores will be automatically updated on the next Canvas sync and you do not need to notify me of make-up poll submissions.

You will also give a short presentation on your final project (likely 10-20 minutes). More details on the project presentation will be announced later on in the class.
Homeworks

Homeworks will consist of problem sets which are a combination of programming assignments and pen-and-paper exercises -- solutions must be written up in LaTeX. I plan to assign homework assignments roughly bi-weekly (about 4 total), plus homework 0, which is designed to help you install the relevant software for the course.

Important: your code must run to get credit! Frequently running and testing your code during development is an essential part of computer programming -- and a very important skill in the real world! This includes making sure that your code works on someone else's machine. The graders won't be able to debug your submission, and code that does not run may receive a 0 or at most 50% of partial credit.

For programming assignments, you should put thought into producing a solution that is not only correct but well written, high-quality code. That is: is it readable, shareable, well-documented, well-commented, logically separated into modules and functions, and reasonably efficient? Are your free response answers thoughtful? We will use Gradescope for homework submissions and grading.
Final Exam

One final exam is planned. Exams are closed-book, but you may bring a single-sided cheat sheet. Exams will be graded on Gradescope.

I reserve the right to curve exams (this can only help you). That means, for example, if 100 points are possible, it may be entered as out of a smaller number of points like 95 or 85 for the purposes of calculating your grade, if the average score of the class was low or if there were unexpectedly difficult questions.
Final Project

There will be a final project (including a project proposal and a presentation) to put the concepts in class to practice. The project will focus on formal verification applied to a real-world software project of your choosing. I will announce more details in class!
Final Grade

For the final (letter) grade, the following are minimum cutoffs. That is, if your grade is above the given percentage, you will definitely receive at least the given grade. However, I reserve the right to lower the cutoffs (i.e. you might get a better grade than what the table says). I will use this to help students who may be on the boundary between two grades at the end of the quarter.
Percentage 	Minimum Grade
93 	A
90 	A-
87 	B+
83 	B
80 	B-
77 	C+
73 	C
70 	C-
67 	D+
63 	D
60 	D-
Policies
AI Policy

AI collaboration is allowed for homework assignments. I encourage you to use AI in a way that is helpful to you, and to use caution that your use of AI is aiding (and not preventing) your own understanding of the material and critical thinking skills. Exams are held in-class and closed-book. Please see also Prof. Jason Lowe-Power's advice here.
Collaboration Policy and Academic Integrity

This class will encourage collaboration; however, each person should complete their own version of the assignment. You should not directly copy code from someone else, even within your study group, but you can receive help and give help on individual parts of an assignment. In a real software development job, it is common to seek and get help; this class will be no different!

You may work on homework assignments in groups of up to 3 people, as long as everyone is working on their own copy of the code. If you do this, please list the names of your collaborators at the top of your submission.

Beyond the above: please use common sense! This course strictly follows the UC Davis Code of Academic Integrity.
Late Policy

In-class participation points (polls) can be made up at any point during the quarter (prior to the last day of class), by submitting the Google form link. The forms will remain open and can be found by viewing the lecture recording or lecture notes for that day. I will not be able to provide a consolidated list of the form links, as their purpose is to encourage you to attend and watch the lectures.

Homeworks will generally be due at 11:59pm on the due date. I cannot guarantee that late homeworks will be graded; however, I encourage you to update your assignments even after the deadline -- Gradescope will allow you to upload late work up to a few days after the assignment deadline. At grading time, we may choose to grade the more recent version at our discretion.
Job Scams

Communication from the instructor will only be sent through official UC Davis email addresses and channels. Please be vigilant of job scams impersonating faculty members. For more information, visit UC Davis Job Scams Prevention.

You can view and report job scam emails at the Phish Bowl.
Be Nice!

Finally: please be kind to each other! UC Davis has policies against harassment and discrimination. Be inclusive of your classmates in group study, in group work and projects, and in your questions and answers in class. If you need to, you may reach me by email to report an issue with a classmate.
Contact and Office Hours

Please use the Piazza for questions related to course material. If you send me an email, I will most likely respond to post your question on Piazza :)

On Piazza, please ask all questions publicly, with only one exception: if your post contains a large snippet of code then make it private. I encourage you to ask anonymously if you feel more comfortable.

The instructor and TAs will be available during office hours for additional support on course material and assignments. The schedule of office hours will be posted in a pinned note on Piazza.

If you have a question that is more sensitive or unrelated to the course, please email me: cdstanford ucdavis edu.
