Now the last proof we did, as we often do, we left
out a few details. And one of the details we
didn't really spell out was that we assumed that when we want to run some program that runs for
a certain amount of time that we can first calculate
how much time it runs for. So in other words, what we did was we
wrote down on input x, the pair X comma 1 and T of n
minus n copies of one, right? In other words, we assume
we can take string. We started with an
extended to be length T of n or T was the time-bounded
we were concerned. So that assumes we can calculate T and then given n.
But what if T of n is itself a computationally
difficult function that cannot be computed
in time 0, t of n. Now that wasn't true of
the function we had. It was like two to the n cubed. And if we were dealing with
the different XP machine, it would have been 2 to the
n to some other constant. Those can be computed, but in time linear in
the time-bound itself. But what if you had a
function like this, a time-bound T of n
equals say two times, then if the nth Turing machine
halts and it's one otherwise. So whether it's even or odd could tell you about the halting problem. This is not even a
computable function. Now if you allow really
pathological time-bound, not exactly this one,
but if you allow pathological time-bound such as this, then it's possible to prove very pathological theorems such
as there is a time-bound t of n, such that time of T of n equals time of two to
the two to the two to the t. So we're simply going to disallow such
functions as time bounds. And we're going to
formally define a function T that takes as input
a natural number, outputs a natural number
to be time constructable. If there's a program that on input will say one to the n and so on, on input, a string of
the length we care about for our time-bound but not the string our machine is going to process. We just want to know how
long is that string. And so you write down and copy
the one you want to be able to compute the number t of n
in at most t of n steps. And this is true of basically every time-bound we tend to talk about. And n squared two to the n, 2 to the n squared, et cetera. But subsequently from
now we're going to assume all time-bound are
actually time constructable. So we don't get these sort of
pathological results like about