So we're going to get into trying to show that certain
problems are not in P. Now, big conjecture is whether
NP is not equal to BA, and that would mean all those NP
complete problems are not NP. Most of the problems we encounter in the real world
that we want to solve quickly, but we don't know how they
turn out to be NP-complete. So we don't yet have any techniques
for proving they're not NP, but we do have some techniques for proving certain
problems are not empty. So let's just look now. Not at what we want to prove, but at the tools we have
which are insufficient. So proving a particular
problem is not NP is tough if you to animate
something like sat, right? And asked me, show that
there's no algorithm for this. That's tough. But one thing that's quite a
bit easier is if you don't have a problem And in mind and
advance that you care about. You just want to demonstrate
that there is some problem. Outside of p. You can just artificially construct one and it's not a natural problem. You care about solving. It just demonstrates something about the structure of these
complexity classes. So the trick, even when you're
artificially construct in an unnatural problem
is to ensure that the problem remains and some
other complexity glass. So in this case here, we're going to use which is
bigger than NP we think. But we aren't going to actually show unconditionally that x is not equal to p by showing there's a
problem in EXP, but not be. Now, as I said, it's
going to be artificial. This won't tell us whether
any natural problem is in XP, but not be. Although I'm going to
point out that there are some problems that are natural there, but we're not going to show it there. A little tougher to show. The more generally, we're going
to show that time of T of n, the problem solvable
in o of t then time is a strict subset of time of f of x. Whenever f grows at a rate
quote sufficiently larger than. So the way this is often
summarized is with more time, you can compute more. So in other words, computational complexity theory
is actually worth study. There's something to
be discovered here. This whole alphabet soup of all these different
complexity glasses is not simply a 1000
different names for Pete. So this is actually more or less
the first theorem proved in computational complexity theory in the mid 1960s that kicked
the whole thing off. Okay, so let's start by
just observing that there is a natural problem solvable
in exponential time, but not in polynomial time. We're not going to prove this, but this is a problem
with the little easier to tell a problem we might
actually want to solve. So here's this problem. We haven't given a name too, Yeah, but we've kind
of talked about it. It's called Circuit value. And this is simply given a Boolean circuit that takes an input and an
assignment to its inputs. So a particular binary string
to give the circuit isn't, but is it one? Alright? So I'm going to say this
is obviously NB, right? You can just trace through each
of the inputs, look at the gates, they're connected to evaluate
the values of those gates, then go to the next layer of the circuit and so on until
you have the output value. So let's now think about a different
way of representing circuits. So let's imagine that you have of
not a surrogate written out in full detail listing all the gates and circuits are essentially
directed graph. Absolutely. We define them as
directed acyclic graphs. So rather than a normal graph
representation where you explicitly list every node u
explicitly list every edge. Let's imagine instead
that way you have is a polynomial time algorithm, AAC. So it's an algorithm for CE. And it succinctly
represents the circuit, meaning it takes as input an integer I write and you imagine each of
the gates can be numbered. Maybe gate number two is
input to gate number five. Is this not gate, gate
number eight is the output. So this takes us input this index for a gate and what
an output, this two things. First of all, the type of
the gate isn't an end or, or is it an input? And it also indicates
essentially the edges. So it just gives the indices of n neighbors and
our neighbors of gay. But, and so if you were
to run this algorithm for all the I represented
indices of gates, you could construct this explicitly
listed representation of it. But this algorithm, when you consider how many bits you need to just
write down the algorithms. In Python, it might be much
smaller than the circuit itself. You might have some
extremely regular circuit. And it's a very big circuit, but it can be described by
a very small algorithm. So not all circuits are that way, but some circuits are regular enough that just the algorithm
itself will take a lot fewer bits to write
down than the circuit that would be output if you ran
the algorithm on every input. So this is called succinct because
it's sort of potentially says. So here's the problem
we're going to think about is this variant
of circuit value. So again, your whole
goal is just given a circuit and an
assignment to evaluate it. If you're not given the
circuit explicitly, you're given this
succinct representation. So you're given an algorithm and you want to know what's
the value of the circuit. And because this circuit
can be much smaller, because the algorithm generating
the circuit can be much smaller. Legwork require many fewer bits to write down than
the circuit itself. Although the time needed to do this would roughly be the same
as the time needed to. Up here, they take
different size inputs. This one, the size of
the input is dominated by the explicit representation
of the circuit. If you had some algorithm for
producing the circuit gate by gate, and that algorithm was logarithmically smaller
than the circuit itself. Well then, although the time needed for each of these is
the same for that circuit, down here, the circuit is represented
with a much smaller input. And so the running time, as a function of the input
would be exponentially larger than the running time up here. So it can't be much more than
that for technical reasons, but that we won't get into. But, so the point is
this problem is in X, but that algorithm isn't necessarily polynomial time because you don't have this large input. Anybody might have
a very small input, but you take the same, the
amount of time to do that. And it turns out this thing is, you know, outside of PPE, we can prove that is something
called EXP complete, which we won't define, but
it's similar to NP-Complete. And in particular, it means that
this is an x minus set minus p. So we're not going to get too much
into this problem, be on this, but this is a problem that you, it's a little bit more natural
and it is, it is solvable. It is solvable in some time-bound
exponential time button, but provably not in polynomial
time on all possible inputs. And just in case you're wondering
the variant of this that looks more like the problems we had
been studying. Circuit SAT. Meaning given us a sink
representation of a circuit, you want to know, is there an
assignment that makes it true, that is NXP complete
as you might expect, going from the deterministic version to the nondeterministic version, the same way circuit
SAT is NP complete.