So it's common to hear
theoretical computer scientists make this observation that upper bounds are easy and
lower bounds are hard. And it's a little bit
of inside terminology there usually when a
theoretical computer scientist says upper-bound, they tend to mean showing that
a problem has an algorithm, like I'd say, an efficient algorithm. Meaning we are, what,
what's the thing? We're putting an upper bound on the computational difficulty
of the algorithm, right? So it's a very jargony
way of phrasing it, but it just means showing
a problem does have say, a fast algorithm or a
space sufficient them. Whereas lower-bound to a theoretical
computer scientists DS domain showing a problem cannot be solved
by some class of algorithm, meaning placing a lower bound on
its computational difficulty. So for example, showing a
problem is NP-complete. Assuming P is not NP, that is placed in a lower-bound and saying no polynomial time
algorithm can solve that problem. So when I say upper bounds are easy, what they mean is coming up
with an algorithm to solve a problem tends to be easier than showing that
there is no algorithm. And the idea is somehow like because you have to do less
work and in some sense. So to show a problem is
in P, we need quote, only find a single polynomial
time algorithm for it, right? It doesn't matter what all those other polynomial
time algorithms would do. And the fact that they would be, if you ran them on an instance of
this problem, they'd be wrong. You just need one algorithm that works for this problem
and you're done. Whereas to show a lower bound, to show that the
problem is not empty, you need to argue about every
possible polynomial-time algorithm and why it gets the answer wrong. So in some sense, this is like why people tend to equip
an upper bounds are easier because you only
have to reason about one algorithm finding
it may not be easy, but once you have it, you
just have to show it works. But for this, you have to show every possible polynomial
time algorithm does not work. So in an algorithms class, you learn about all sorts
of techniques for trying to make algorithms polynomial time, make them faster than
just brute force search. We don't have quite as
many techniques for these lower bounds,
but we have a few. So let's look now at a few techniques we do have for proving lower bounds. In other words, for showing
that a certain problem has no algorithm within a certain sort of complexity resource constraints. So my favorite example of
this is the first one I ever learned when I was an undergrad
in my algorithms course. I don't think I really appreciated
at the time, but they, they kinda gave us a glimpse of it and it was very fascinating to me. So we learned, you know, the naive sorting algorithms
like the one that you would probably come up
with your first term, you took a programming class. They tend to be quadratic
time, right thing. Most people, if they're
asked to come up with a sorting algorithm when they
finally get it, we're again, it's probably one of
the insertion sort or bubble sort or one of the, the slower sorting algorithms. Then you learned about these much
faster algorithms that take time n log n. And for this
little section here, we're not going to
consider everything polynomial time to be
equally fast here. We really care that, yeah, n log n is really
faster than n squared. And it's slower than O of n. So when you learn that
you can get rid of, that, you can turn one of the ends
and n squared into a log of n, which is looking just at that term. It's a very strong reduction in
the complexity of that term. You might ask, what
can you do better? Like can we get, say, a linear
time algorithm for sorting? So for here we get a
formalize a little better. What do we mean by sorting? So here's the task and an assortment. Remember in, in this
course we just consider inputs to be binary strings, right? We often talk about them like
they're more structured data, but under the hood they're
all binary strings. So if I tell you sorted X is this input that we
represent in binary. You don't quite know
what I mean, right? Because I have to tell you
how is the data structured? Does it represent a list of three bit integers and they're
all the same number of bits. So we can just concatenate
the bits and not have to remember the boundaries like so here ir integers between 07 and sorting them from here would
make them look like this is a two bit symbols, like maybe they represent DNA bases. And then we would sort of like this. Is it. That's, I want to
sort the bed semana, just put all the ones at the end. So it kinda matters. So to get this lower bound
we're going to talk about, we're going to make a little
bit of an assumption here. So it's not going to be a
lower bound that applies to every possible algorithm
you could be talking about. It's one that assumes you can't see the bits that encode the array. So what do I mean by
you can't see the beds? What I mean is that, you know
that somehow this input x, it encodes an array. But you can actually look inside of it and see the data
that composes each one. All you have is access to a comparator function that you
give two indices, I and j. And it tells you is the ith
item less than the J type. And that's not such a
terribly strong assumption that every sorting
algorithm nearly that we learn about tends to be like because it tends to
be that they don't much care what is the data
inside each array element. All they do quicksort, heapsort, insertion
sort, bubble sort. All they do is they just repeatedly
pick pairs of elements in the array and they don't look at
fully detailed into the data. They just asked these two elements which one's bigger based on that, you know what to do next. So this is a so-called
black box comparison. So if we want to reason only about these kinds
of sorting algorithms, which is nearly all
the ones you study. These are all black-box swords and so are most of the
others and learn about. We can prove unconditionally, we don't need anything
like assume P is not NP. We're going to show
black-box sorting algorithms require omega of n log n comparisons. So there's some constant. And the constants going to turn
out to be pretty close to one. But it means there's some constants
so that you need at least that constant times n log n comparisons
to get these things sorted. So how do we show that? So
every sorting algorithm for each possible length n of the list you want to sort has an associated decision
tree describing the items. Then it's going to compare. No matter what is
the length and list. So we, you imagine
what happens is you do some computation and at some
point you ask, is a less than b? So here I'm using a, B, and C to refer to the element that's initially
in the first position. B is the element
initially in the second, C is initially and maybe
they get shuffled around. But when I ask is like a less than b, it means is the element that started in position
one less than that, that the, the element, they're less than the element that
started at position two. So you ask this and then if yes, maybe you do some more
computation of no, you do some different computation. And then maybe the next black
box comparison as you ask, is b less than c If you want left? And if so, maybe you now conclude there already
in the right order, a is less than b is less than c.
And you can see that would be the appropriate comparison
if a is less than b and b is less than c
there in the right order. But if not, you do, maybe
do some more computation. Maybe you now ask, is a less than c? And at this point the answer is yes, this is the proper order. So you should put them in order acb, otherwise you do CAB. And this is abstracting away
like what other computation happens besides just
doing the comparison. So who knows how much
computation happens here, we're going to show that
even if the computation represented by these
arrows was instantaneous, still the total number of comparisons you have to do
is going to be n log n. So we don't worry so much
about what the computation is. We just know you do some
comparisons and when you're done, you reached a sort of leaf
of this decision tree. And that tells you how to
rearrange these elements. So if the initial answer was no, we maybe do some more
comparison and some more. And what we get is a tree. And the leaves, right, represents all the possible
sorted orders and ABC depending on how big they
are relative to each other. In other words, depending on the results of the answers
to these questions. And there's three elements. So there's three factorial
which is 3 times 2 is 6. There's six different
orders of these. And so there ought to be at least six different leaves here to represent all the
possible different orders. This could be sorted in depending on the relative comparisons
we get between a, B, and C. So each list of length and traverses some branch
of this tree, right? If you change the values, but you didn't change the
answers to these questions, it would traverse the same branch. But if you swap the relative order, it means you'll take a different
turn somewhere in this tree. And now we ask, okay, we want to know the
worst-case running time on any list of length that this
is the question we ask. Most often. What's the worst-case running time? Well, the worst-case running time, or at least the worst case
number of comparisons. We just assume that somehow these arrows represent
instantaneous computation. But the worst case number of comparisons we have
to do is the depth of this tree is the longest path
from the leaf to any rate. So how many leaves are in the tree? Well, it's going to be
at least n factorial. Again, in this example, there's one leaf per
possible permutation of ABC. But maybe you got a
inefficient algorithm. Maybe, some of these leaves repeat. Maybe a being less than b, b, a less than c, less than
b shows up twice here. But you have to have each
permutation appear at least once to represent what if
that is the sorted order? So the leaves are going to
be at least n factorial. And what do we know about binary
tree is that the depth of a binary tree is at least a
log of the number of leaks. And a log of n factorial
is theta of n log n. I think I had you do
that on the homework 0. So in other words, the depth of this tree is
going to be at least n log n. And this shows that even if all of the computation is instantaneous, still just the number of comparisons you have to do is at least n log n. So of course, the
running time is going to involve doing comparisons
and some other stuff. So the running time also
has to be at least n log n. So this shows a bound and the information needed to
determine the proper sorted order. And uses that to get
this running time. Now that said, this is only for a
particular class of algorithms, those that do blackbox sorting that
their only access to the data. It inside the list is just
comparing pairs of items. But sometimes the boxes
aren't really black. So like radix sort, for instance, this consort and integers, if they're each embeds
in time O of n times m. Now all the integers are distinct, then you can do a
counting argument to show that most of them require
at least log of n bits. And this would be an
n log n algorithm. But you can have duplicates, right? And that's precisely
when radix sort is a lot faster than these
other algorithms, is like say you have a huge list, but all it has is just the
digits 0 through nine. Then you can sort it in
time O of N times 10, right? No matter how big n. Or to think about an even faster one, what if you're just
sorting bets, Right? The only have two
possible elements to 01. And so you can ask a
more stringent question. And given two elements which
is bigger, you can ask, actually ask, is this
element 0 or is it one? And you can assume it's one of those do and think for a bit when you're on how to come up with a linear time sorting algorithm, it's
pretty straightforward. So radix sort looks inside
the box at the bits. So a black box analogy for some of the other problems we've thought
about like 3-sat would be this. If a 3 CNF formula may only be black box queried with
test assignments, right? For example, you can
give an assignment, you can ask, does this
make it true or not? But you can't examine the clauses. You don't, you know, you know that somehow it's a three CNF formula. You don't know how
many clauses, as you don't know where the literals are. All you can do is just give it
a potential assignment and say, Okay, try to set a equal to one
and b equals to 0 and so forth. And it can tell you, does
that make it true or false? It's pretty clear to see
that in the worst case, you have to test all possible
two to the n assignments. You're getting no information out of that formula other
than for each input. Is it true or false? So all you're going do is just come up with
assignments and give it. And whatever your algorithm does, it gives them in some order. So if you make the formula, depend on the algorithms so that there is one
satisfying assignment, the last one that the algorithm test, then it would require two to
the n time to render a law. Now, 3-sat is not in
fact a black box though. There are algorithms
based on looking at the clause structure that
run faster than that. So for example, there's a
still exponential time, but not this really bad exponential. It's a slightly better exponential
running time for something based on the idea that
we can learn something about the formula through the
structure of the clauses.