So we said that theoretical
computer scientists are not just guessing when
they say P is not NP. If p is indeed equal to NP, this is known to have a
number of consequences. And while we can't rule out
any of those consequences, we can talk about how
they in some sense would be even more surprising
than P equals NP. So one of the consequences if P equals NP is that there's
many other complexity classes also equal to p. So if somehow the power of non-determinism
is no power at all, the day doesn't speed up
computation significantly. If that were true, it would actually grant
vastly more power to machines that look even
more powerful than, than np verifier or nondeterministic polynomial time Turing machines. So here's one sort of
straightforward example. If P equals NP, then p is
also equal to co-NP, right? And this is the power you get with for all quantifiers
instead of quantifiers. So why is that? Pause
and think about that. All right, because P is kinda
clearly closed under complement, you can swap the yes and no answers of any deterministic computation. And now you're deciding
the compliment problem. So P equals COPI. So if they're both equal to NP, well then co-NP equals k. So let's look at something
that's not quite so obvious. So okay, we're sort of rephrasing what we mean
here by NP and co-NP. So assume b is some predicate NP. So it takes two inputs, x and w, and it
returns true or false. And as always, when we pair
this witness w with X, we assume it's bounded in length by a polynomial
in the length of x. So in this light, we can say that NP predicates
are of the form, right? So an NP predicate a
with one input x is expressible using B and
an exists quantifier. So a of x is true if and only if there is a W obeying this up here. So that b of x w is true. And co-NP corresponds to
predicates of the form a of x is true if and only if
for all w b of x, w is true. So with this view in
mind that you get an NP predicate if you start with something that can be
decided in polynomial time. But then putting an exists
quantifier unwanted, it's two inputs, right? We could imagine,
well, what if we had more quantifiers in front here? So this helps us define
class, but sigma p2. So sigma p2 predicates
there questions just like NP and co-NP
about a single input. But we characterize them with a polynomial-time computable
predicate that takes more inputs, in this case three inputs. So a sigma two predicate is one
that you can answer by asking. Does there exist a y not
too much bigger than x, meaning polynomial that
does there exist a y, so that for all z, b of XYZ is true. Okay, so we can make that
mathematical generalization is very abstract. It's kind of hard to think at
this level of abstraction. Let's do an example. So here is a sigma p2 predicate P. So given a Boolean circuit C, well, circuits compute functions
and they output a yes or no. So they're predicate
type of functions. So they, they take some bits as
input and the output one bit. We want to ask the question, Is there a smaller circuit
computes the same predicates? So there's the questions. It's somehow about optimizing
the size of circuits. It's actually a very important
problem in, in VLSI design. So why is this a sigma two predicate? Well, the answer is yes. If what's true, what would have
to be true for there to be a smaller circuit computing
that same predicate. Well, there would have to
exist a circuit d whose size, maybe number of gates is that moat is strictly smaller
than the size of C. And they'd have to compute
the same function. Well, what does it mean for D and
C to compute the same function? Well, means for all inputs
w in 0, 1 to the n, The output C gives on w is the
same as the output D Giza, right? And you can always sort of stack
all the quantifiers in the front. So I wrote it the natural way where one of the things we're
saying doesn't involve w, it just involves DNC. So we can say, oh,
there's a circuit these smaller than sees that
all this is true. But you can always put all the quantifiers up front and it just becomes harder to
follow the sentence, but it's saying the same thing. There's a circuit D. So
that for all inputs, w, d is less than c. Okay? We didn't talk about W yet, but we will d is less than Zn. See if w equals DFW. Or put another way, it seems kind of redundant that for every single w we're going
to assert D is less than C. But it's, if it's true for one of
them, It's true for all of them. And so the exist for all right here kind of corresponds
to these two quantifiers. And then this predicate right here, it's a function of three inputs. The original input, see that we're asking about
that would be like X. The exists input, the
first exists input D, and then the for all input, which is w. And then
what's this predicate? Well, this predicate
is given three inputs, a circuit C, a circuit
D, and an input W. Is it the case that D is
size, smaller than c? And they compute the same
value on this one input. Well that's polynomial time. We just compare number
of gates. This is easy. And evaluating a circuit
on just one input, well, that can be done
easily in polynomial time. Okay, So the polynomial hierarchy is how we kind of generalize this. So this is the decision problem
that we just talked about. Given a Boolean circuit C, we want to answer
the yes-no question. Is there a smaller circuit? Now, the real optimization
problem we're interested in is finding
a smaller circuit, find the smallest circuit
computed in the same function. But as we've alluded, solving this decision problem. It has to be at least as hard. And in fact, if we could solve it, we could, we could
solve the optimization. So this corresponded to
ask him exists for all. And then polynomial-time
predicate type of question. Now, the negation of
this right, through it, the answer to this is no, that's true if c is actually the
smallest circuit computing fancy. So smallest Boolean
circuit is the negation or smaller Boolean circuit
and the a or the complement. We think about these as sets. So the complements of problems in sigma p2 form a class called py p2. And so if we think of
NP is being sigma P1, there's just one quantifier
out in front and it's exists and co-NP is Pi P1 and there's one quantifier and it's
for all and the Sigma and Pi are because exist is kinda like Boolean OR which is kind
of like the addition. And then pi is kind of like a product which is
kinda like Boolean end, which is kind of like for all that, you know, it's just a notation. So the Pi corresponds to for all. So this set of compliments
here is this, well, if we extend that sigma p2, the set of all complements of
things and sigma two is pi v2. And what would it mean to take
a complement of one of these? It would mean you'd put
a negation in front. But if you pass the negation through it flips the exist for all the, for all to this. And then finally, you just negate
a polynomial-time predicate, you get another
polynomial-time predicate. So that's why negating one of
these gives you 10 things. And you can extend this. You can say, well, you can have exists for
all exists or for all, exists for all and so on. And that gives you all these others and that set of all
these possible classes, this is called the
polynomial-time hierarchy. The hierarchy you get by
stacking successively more exist or for all
alternating quantifiers in front of some polynomial time. So another way to think about these, I sometimes find this
useful is as a tree where each sort of edge you following the tree is one
of these quantifiers. And so an exists tree is asking does their IRS IEPs are
each edge corresponds to, sorry, a, a non-deterministic decision when you're doing a
non-deterministic computation. So suppose this is all the
non-deterministic choice as your egg. So if we view that nondeterministic
machine as an NP machine, we're asking, does there exist
a computation path that accent? Now if we view it as a co-NP
machine, we're asking, is it the case that all possible
computation paths, et cetera. So black arrow means except
green means download. So we would say one of these
steps if any of its leaves, except we would say for all n, for all nondeterministic
machine accepts only all of its leaves represent an
accepting computation path. A sigma p2 tree would be exists
for all who would ask, well, does there exist some subtree here so that for all leaves in
the subtree their true. So it would kind of look like this. An exists for all exists tree
would look kind of like this. And a for all exists
for all of the great, This is it the case that
for all children here, there is a child below there such that for all children
below there, it's true. So you can kind of think of these
being characterized by Howard, the leaves colored to
say you except okay, so these pair of classes, sigma p2 and pi v2, again, we call those the kth level
of the polynomial hierarchy. One other way to think about
these is in some sense they're like two player
games that last for Kb. So why do I say that? Well, if I claim we're plates a chess and I
said I have checkmate in KMT. What does it mean to
say I have checkmate means I can win.
Well, why can I went? Because there's a move I can make. So that no matter what you do, for all moves my opponent could make. There could be many,
but for all of them, There's another move
I can make so that no matter what they do
in response to that, there's a move I can make
and so and so forth and so forth for k moves,
at the end of which, no matter what moves
the opponent made, if I made the right one and response
and take the opponents king. And so in some sense, you can't really characterize having
checkmate of an NP predicate. But checkmate in K moves can be characterized as K
alternating quantifiers, where the for all are necessary to capture that my opponent
is going to try as hard as they can to it and pick
the best move for them.