Okay, So we've talked quite
a bit about NP completeness. And we're going to
step back from you, proving particular
problems are NP-complete. To just accept in a lot of important problems we'd like
to solve are NP-complete. Now, what does that mean? Does it mean we can't solve them? Or is there some
possibility P equals NP? So this quote from the textbook talks about the
evidence in favor of cookies. Audience hypotheses. They're,
they're talking about. The hypothesis that p is not equal to nb is so overwhelming the
consequences of their failures so grotesque that their status maybe have Speak compared to that of physical laws rather than that of ordinary
mathematical conjectures. Meaning there's just a
lot about the world that seems to point in the direction
of P not equal in entropy. So let's think a bit about this problem that we call
P versus NP and then compare that problem to other
major open mathematical questions. So there's a very famous list
that P versus NP appears on. It's the clay Millennium
Prize problems. That words are put together. I mean that the problems
are known for a long time, but in 2000 they were put
together by the Clay Institute. And for each one of them, there's a prize of $1 million
to solve any of them. And so far only one, the Poincare conjecture
has been resolved. And they were all sort of
agreed upon to be lit. Some of the just made
absolutely major, staggeringly difficult open
problems in mathematics. And these others are
important problems. I guess I actually don't
really understand. Most of them kind of understand
the Riemann hypothesis. Not so much most of the others. But I'll accept the word a
mathematician so they're important. But P versus NP, this problem is about the nature
of problem-solving itself, right? Is it harder to find
solutions than to check them? And it's often said that if you can resolve it by proving P equals NP, you wouldn't get a million dollars, you'd get 6 million
because you could use it to go and solve the other
opening problems as well.