Okay, so this artificial
problem, catch-22 t, is designed to be unsolvable by
every T of n time-bounded program. But it is solvable, right? I promised you that we're not
just going to show there's some problem outside of time of t, Then we're going to show it is
solvable in some bigger time. So how much time do I need
to solve? Catch-22 of t? Well, in order to solve it, right, what do we have to do? We have to know what
would in oninput p, What would do when run
on its own source code? And we don't even have to know
eventually we'll just have to know within t of length of P steps. So we could solve and eight and
then we just negate the answer. That's what Catch-22 it. So we could just simulate P, a P for this many steps. So it does not only take
TO length of P steps and contradict the fact that catch-22 T cannot be solved
and that many steps. So think about that for a second. Why? Why is that? So no, because the simulation
encourages a slowdown, right? We can't simulate P
for this many steps. In exactly that many steps, there's some slowdown
happening. How much? So this is where the details
get a little tricky. It depends on the
programming language, right? Or are you talking about Python? C plus plus? Are you talking
about multi take Turing machines? So we're going to, for now we're just going to leave
that slowdown has a parameter. We're going to define S of t. For the programming
language we care about to be the number of steps
required to simulate the steps of a program
using an interpreter written in the same
programming language, right? So for Turing machines is
not that hard to show. S of t is o of t squared that
one Turing machine can suit, you know, it can be
given the description of another and simulate it. And there's a quadratic slow down. Someone not a very non-obvious proof shows
that in fact that can be reduced to o of t log t for
to take turning Michigan's. For programming
languages like Python, it tends to be the case that this is sort of
special tutoring machines. So this is one of the reasons that I only like to
use Turing machines as the model when it seems
like we need that formalism. But when we're just
talking about programming, there's a few things they
do that are a little awkward compared to regular
programming languages. And this is one of them that you have this inherent simulation overhead. For most programming languages, S of t is the right. I can the Python interpreter. For each basic step
in a Python program, it takes a constant number of
steps of the interpreter to do it. So for most programming languages, S of T is 0 if TV, but the big O constant
is bigger than 1, right? So for these languages, because the big O is
kind of disappear in the definition of this
deterministic time glass. Time of S of T of n is the
same as time of T of n. Now, that's not the only thing
that has to happen. We do have to simulate p
of p for this many steps, but we have to know, well, what
did we reach that many steps? Even if you did have this
lightening fast simulation, it's just like real time one step of this algorithm
for every step of P, The simulating algorithm
also has to set off an alarm clock that goes off
after t of n steps, right? So you do need a little time to actually like count how
many steps that we've done. And in particular to be
able to do that count in, in not too much extra time we need tend to be time constructable, right? It can't be some
crazy time-bound that takes way longer to compute
than the number it outputs. Okay, So with those sort
of ugly details in place, now we can formally state
this time hierarchy theorem. And this what tells us that
if you allow more time, you can actually solve more problems. So I'll state the more
complicated version that says, you know, if your
programming language has this function telling you
the simulation slow down. So it takes S of T steps
to simulate t steps of an arbitrary program while
running this alarm clocks. So that's all buried and S here. Then the theorem says, as long as t is time
constructable and g is strictly smaller,
it's a little o of t. Then the problems you can solve
in only g of n amount of time, or a strict subset of those you can solve in S of T of n amount of time. And that looks a little complicated, but the proof is
essentially that what we showed in that time lower
bound a few slides ago is that catch-22 is one of these problems in this bigger
set on the right here it's in, it's solvable in time
S of T of n, right? So we, we run p on input
peeve for, for t steps, our program doing that and takes S of that many steps to do it and see
what it does and then negate it. And we prove that it is not in time. G of n for any g is
strictly smaller than. Now, the corollary for most
programming languages, where S of T is just o of t, right? So not Turing machines. Language languages is just
the simpler thing to state, which is that you've got
to time bounds T and G, and G is strictly smaller. In that case, you can solve more problems with time T of
n than you can with time GDB. And you just have to get
a little ugly if you're talking about Turing
machines because they're simulation overhead is
a little bit bigger. So in particular, it means we
have this hierarchy of problems. We don't really consider
sub-linear time in this class, although that is a very
interesting subject, is called streaming algorithms that, that study sub-linear time. But the smallest one
we'll consider is linear. And we now know that
is a strict subset of problems solvable
in quadratic time. Those are a strict subset of problems solvable in just a little bit
more than quadratic time, like end the 2.1, which is a subset of problems
solvable in cubic time. And if we allowed
end of the 100 time, yet more problems will be solvable. So these are strict
containment there. And then that of course, is a strict subset of P because P contain things like
n to the 1 thousand. And that's a strict subset of time
t to time of n to the log of n, because p is defined by
n raised to a constant, but log of n grows faster
than any constant. But that itself is a strict subset of this two to the N time-bound, which is itself a strict subset
or two to the two n, right? Notice that there's a constant
here compared to here, but this, this is not
big O of this, right? Because this is essentially
this time-bound squared. And then you could put a
bigger constant there. And then you're going to
replace this linear polynomial in the exponent with a bigger
polynomial in the exponent. And that's all a subset of EXP. And then x is itself a subset of
problems solvable in time two to the two to the n. And that's a strict subset of the
so-called experts, which is, you replace this end
here with another polynomial.