So I want to talk a bit about
mathematical proofs. Now. We're asking you in homework
to give some proofs. But, and we tell you
it'll be precise, be as formal as you can. But we don't really mean
formal mathematical proof in the way that
logicians talk about it. So what exactly is a
formal mathematical proof? It's not the things we
usually write back. Well, you know what I tend
to call a proof that I put in my writing and
my research papers. What I asked you to do on
the homework is just write down some sentences so
that somebody intelligent, but who didn't see why the
theorem is true before, reads it. Well now they do see why
it's true that to me that's, that's what a convincing proof is. But when we talk the way logicians do about formal
mathematical proofs, we tend to take that and demand
and we go to weigh more level of detail such that a computer
program could verify it. So technically a formal
mathematical proof is a series of simple steps. Each one of them apply in
either an axiom that you just assume without proving our a theorem, which is a statement
that you conclude from a series of simple
step from the axioms. So for example, you might remember these horrible things from high
school, these geometric proofs. So here's one of them stating that the angle a PC equals the angle BPD. And then there's the proof
of it that comes from the axioms or do you tend to call
them postulates in geometry? And you just apply each of them. And again, I'm showing you
this just to say, okay, there is technically a way to
formalize mathematical proofs. Some cruel high school teachers may have forced you to do
it with geometry and taken an extremely obvious statement
like this angle equals this angle and then pretended like it's not obvious and that you
have to prove this. And actually one of
my favorite essays about mathematics is called a mathematician's element
by Paul locker, I suggest you go read it. It's very good. But he uses this as an example of how high-school geometry students should not be thinking about
proofs and says this about it. So I agree with him about that. However, when you want
to formally study logic, right now, when you want to do, just do mathematics are just
figure out what's true and false. But when you want to formally study logic and asked me what
does it postulate? What, what is possible
to prove in principle? What's possible to know about the
mathematical world in principle, then you do have to formalize it. And this is what we mean
by proof in that context. Okay? So when we're talking
about proofs that can be processed by a computer or verified by a computer will checking proofs like that is
tedious, but it's simple. You just verifying that each
statement either is an axiom or it follows by one of your rules of deduction from the previous
statements that you've proved. So here's a statement that sort of, once you kinda get that definition
in your head, is kind of, is obviously solvable
in polynomial time, which is given a mathematical
statement and a proof of it, you want to ask the question,
is P a valid proof of S? Right? And this is what
proof checkers do. I mean, this is what
the systems like, like Coke do that. And are able to verify formerly written proofs is
they just apply the rules of deduction and verify that each step follows from
one of the previous ones. So because this problem, it takes these two inputs. And remember our definition of NP, we had one input for the
problem we care about in a second one for the verifier
that was the witness. That because this problem is in P, This one is an NP where you're given essentially only the statement. It's actually an
optimization problems. Like all optimization problems
we have the input we care about, and then a threshold to turn the optimization problem
into a decision problem. So the optimization problem
is given radical statement. Does it have what's the
shortest proof of it? But phrased as a decision problem, we can ask, does it have a
proof of length n or less? And the NP, the verifier for this is the algorithm for this
state, this problem up here. So, so it's in NP. I'm going to claim it's
actually NP complete. Pause and think about that. Actually don't pause. I
won't talk about it here, but asked about it if
you want to later. So how would you show that the Boolean satisfiability problem is polynomial-time reducible to
this short proof problem. So this sort of idea leads us to
the third grotesque consequence. If P equals NP, that makes us think they're
probably not equal. And it would be the complete
demise of mathematical creativity. So write down any unsolved
mathematical problem, Goldbach's conjecture,
the Riemann hypothesis, or any of those $1
million clay problems. Where, you know, for
the clay problems, you're going to get a million
dollars if you prove it. But there's probably no
human on earth who's going to prove it with a proof that
has more than a billion steps. I mean, they can try it,
it probably won't ever find this if they did, and they published a several
gigabyte text document proving it, nobody would ever be
able to verify it. So if give you expect to in practice, be able to solve one
of these problems and convince other people it solved. You will probably come up
with a, a short proof, a proof with a billion
steps service. Okay. And you know, any
human written proof, even if you took the
thing we normally call, Approve and tediously expand
at the formal detail. So it's one of these machine verifiable formal proofs is going
to be less than a billion steps. So in other words, all of mathematics could be automated
because if P equals NP, NP-complete problems, short proof
that can answer this question, that, that would have a
polynomial time algorithm. Okay, with machine learning, maybe this is going to happen anyway. But, but, you know, but like most machine learning, we probably wouldn't be
correct on all inputs, so I wouldn't know how
much we want to trust. So this isn't just mathematics, most scientific fields, right? If you really pull your gaze back and try to say
what do they all have in common? Well, they repeatedly trying
to solve this problem. Given some set E, experimental data. For example, astronomical
observations, say of where the planets are each night and an integer t. And again, for technical reasons, we'll
put it in the urinary. We will want to find is a theory t, for example, Kepler's laws of planetary motion of length n
or less, that explains it. You can run other
words, we want to find a short set of rules that
explain these observations. So if P were NP, this is what the textbook has to say. No longer would we need
a Kepler to perceive elliptical orbits or a Newton to
guess the inverse square law. Fighting these theories
becomes just as easy as checking that
they fit the data. And that seems very counterintuitive. This doesn't prove P is not NP. But I think this constitutes very strong evidence
that they're not equal. We don't actually think
creativity is this easy. Okay? So there's other reasons to
believe that P is not NP. I've strongly recommend
this blog post by Scott Aronson called
reasons to believe. And he had another one later. The scientific case
for p not equal to NB. That said, not all theoretical
computer scientists are so convinced. **** Lipton is chief among them. He likes to remind us repeatedly
the fact that we don't have a proof is evidence
that maybe it's true. And he thinks we should consider very seriously the possibility
that there is a polynomial algorithm for
something like satisfiability. But we just need vast sort of advancements in our understanding of algorithms to be able to do it. And yeah, that wouldn't be surprising because we clearly
need vast advances in our understanding to prove that sad is not going to eat because they haven't been
able to do that either. So certainly resolving this question requires that we figure out
someone we don't know yet.