Okay, so let's look at another
consequence of P equals NP, which again, doesn't prove
that they're unequal. But it establishes that some even more surprising things
would happen if they were, gives us evidence that
they're not equal. So the textbook says a common misconceptions that P
versus NP is about polynomial time. But it's really a
question about the power of non-determinism in general. Whether finding
solutions is harder than checking them regardless
of how much time we have. So in this section we're going to show if they're equal, then in fact, the problem is decidable in time T are equal to the problems
decidable in time. Non-deterministically
decidable in time t for essentially any class of functions t that grows
at least polynomially. So recall that XP is the problem is decidable and exponential time, or time looks something
like two to the end. The sum constant, like
two to the n cubed, two to the end of the tenth. And then NX is similar except
with a non-deterministic machine. And this is question, is x equal
to NX? Well, we don't know. But what we're going to show
is that if P and NP are equal, well then so are these. And really, as this is
anything kind of above it, but we're going to,
we're going to use exponential just to be concrete
because it'll be easier. And this is a very
nice proof technique which can be useful in other
areas called padding, right? So if you hear me talking
about the padding proof technique, It's this. So we have to show if P is NP, then x equals and x, and x is clearly a subset of X. So in other words, we have to show assuming P equals NP, x is a subset of X. So we'll pick an arbitrary
a and an XP and show we can get rid of the
non-determinism and decide it deterministically
in exponential time. So because it's an annex, there's a, say two to the n cubed. Now maybe not MQ, maybe end of
the fifth, maybe end of the 100. But for some constant up here, Let's just use cubed to be concrete. There's a predicate decidable
in this amount of time be XW, so that a of x is true if and only if there is a W of an
appropriate length bound, because this is exponential time, we're going to allow
exponentially large witnesses. So that b of x w is true. That's the definition of n x. Okay, So let's think
about the problem that we're going to define called SI, see is the so-called patent problem. So the input to see is a
binary string of length, and we'll call it. And then a urinary string
of length k minus n. So n is simply this
number given to us. It's going to be something like
the length of this X up here. And then k is going to be arbitrary, but we'll use it on
particular values of k. The first question
we're going to ask is, is it the case that k is
equal to 2 to the n cubed? In other words, we want to
know this whole string, but together you just
concatenated x and p. Would that whole thing
equal 2 to the n cubed? If n is the length of x here, if not, we're just
going to reject, right? We just want to say now, we're only going to consider inputs
where k has this exponential, is exponentially bigger than that. But if so, the question we're
going to ask about this input is, is there a W of length k, where k is the difference
between n cubed and n. So that b of x w is true. So is not really a question
about P here, right? So there's two inputs, x
and p, but all we've used, P4 is just to get past
this first gate here, verify the length is correct. Now all we want to do is just
ask this question about X and W, where W is going to be
quite a bit bigger tax. So here's like a representative
example of how these look. Log p, The new areas, just a bunch of ones. X is some binary string
we want to know, is there a W of this huge length that makes B of this x comma this W true. So here's a
non-deterministic algorithm that can solve this problem, sees an artificial problem. It's not really useful. It's just going help us
get this proof-of-work. But here's an algorithm to solve it. It will non-deterministically guess w of the right length
that takes time k. We just generate bits
k times in a row. Now we, now B is decidable in
exponential time two to the n cubed. So run the decider for B on x and
w. Now that you've guessed w, How much time does that take? Well, it takes two to the n cubed, but k is 2 to the n cubed. So another way of saying
that is it takes time k, This length that's quite
a bit bigger than x, but it's actually by definition, the length of our
entire input, right? So season, but size is K. N is like the input to this, this first input to be
that K is the input to C. So C is actually solvable in
nondeterministic linear time, right? This time linear in c is
input the lot bigger than x, but x is not the whole input. The input is x NP together. So this padding essentially means C runs pretty fast as a
function of its input size. It's pretty slow as a function
of the designer for B. But, but it's laying around. And remember we assume
p is equal to NP. So in fact, see is not only solvable in nondeterministic
linear time, it's decidable in polynomial time. Maybe we need more than linear, but the polynomials are all
kinda equivalent in here. So because it's an NB, it's also in P. So there's a
polynomial time algorithm for z. So here's a deterministic
algorithm for a. Remember a is solvable in
nondeterministic exponential time. Now we want to show we can solve it in deterministic exponential time. We're going to use this
deterministic algorithm that exists for C,
that's polynomial time. So how do we, how do we determine if a of x is true on
input x of length, then compute C of what? Well, the first input is x, the second input is enough ones to make the entire length
2 to the n cube, which means to the n cube
minus the n bits over an x. So Season P, which means there's a polynomial
time algorithm for this. It's polynomial time in
the length of the input. To see, again, we're kinda do a
lot of things jumping around here, but how big is the input to see? It's this number k, it's n plus k minus
n, So it's just k. And k is 2 to the n cubed, right? So if we're polynomial in case
they were k to the fifth, that means or two to the
n cubed to the fifth, which is two to the five n cubed. So that's a bigger exponential, that's still exponential
and AES input leg. But that's a deterministic algorithm. So in fact, a unsolvable
deterministically in exponential time.