en-ECS 220 4a_6 (P vs. NP) vs. other major mathematical questions.txt

Okay, So we've talked quite
a bit about NP completeness. And we're going to
step back from you, proving particular
problems are NP-complete. To just accept in a lot of important problems we'd like
to solve are NP-complete. Now, what does that mean? Does it mean we can't solve them? Or is there some
possibility P equals NP? So this quote from the textbook talks about the
evidence in favor of cookies. Audience hypotheses. They're,
they're talking about. The hypothesis that p is not equal to nb is so overwhelming the
consequences of their failures so grotesque that their status maybe have Speak compared to that of physical laws rather than that of ordinary
mathematical conjectures. Meaning there's just a
lot about the world that seems to point in the direction
of P not equal in entropy. So let's think a bit about this problem that we call
P versus NP and then compare that problem to other
major open mathematical questions. So there's a very famous list
that P versus NP appears on. It's the clay Millennium
Prize problems. That words are put together. I mean that the problems
are known for a long time, but in 2000 they were put
together by the Clay Institute. And for each one of them, there's a prize of $1 million
to solve any of them. And so far only one, the Poincare conjecture
has been resolved. And they were all sort of
agreed upon to be lit. Some of the just made
absolutely major, staggeringly difficult open
problems in mathematics. And these others are
important problems. I guess I actually don't
really understand. Most of them kind of understand
the Riemann hypothesis. Not so much most of the others. But I'll accept the word a
mathematician so they're important. But P versus NP, this problem is about the nature
of problem-solving itself, right? Is it harder to find
solutions than to check them? And it's often said that if you can resolve it by proving P equals NP, you wouldn't get a million dollars, you'd get 6 million
because you could use it to go and solve the other
opening problems as well.-e 

en-ECS 220 4a_6.1-1 the polynomial hierarchy.txt

So we said that theoretical
computer scientists are not just guessing when
they say P is not NP. If p is indeed equal to NP, this is known to have a
number of consequences. And while we can't rule out
any of those consequences, we can talk about how
they in some sense would be even more surprising
than P equals NP. So one of the consequences if P equals NP is that there's
many other complexity classes also equal to p. So if somehow the power of non-determinism
is no power at all, the day doesn't speed up
computation significantly. If that were true, it would actually grant
vastly more power to machines that look even
more powerful than, than np verifier or nondeterministic polynomial time Turing machines. So here's one sort of
straightforward example. If P equals NP, then p is
also equal to co-NP, right? And this is the power you get with for all quantifiers
instead of quantifiers. So why is that? Pause
and think about that. All right, because P is kinda
clearly closed under complement, you can swap the yes and no answers of any deterministic computation. And now you're deciding
the compliment problem. So P equals COPI. So if they're both equal to NP, well then co-NP equals k. So let's look at something
that's not quite so obvious. So okay, we're sort of rephrasing what we mean
here by NP and co-NP. So assume b is some predicate NP. So it takes two inputs, x and w, and it
returns true or false. And as always, when we pair
this witness w with X, we assume it's bounded in length by a polynomial
in the length of x. So in this light, we can say that NP predicates
are of the form, right? So an NP predicate a
with one input x is expressible using B and
an exists quantifier. So a of x is true if and only if there is a W obeying this up here. So that b of x w is true. And co-NP corresponds to
predicates of the form a of x is true if and only if
for all w b of x, w is true. So with this view in
mind that you get an NP predicate if you start with something that can be
decided in polynomial time. But then putting an exists
quantifier unwanted, it's two inputs, right? We could imagine,
well, what if we had more quantifiers in front here? So this helps us define
class, but sigma p2. So sigma p2 predicates
there questions just like NP and co-NP
about a single input. But we characterize them with a polynomial-time computable
predicate that takes more inputs, in this case three inputs. So a sigma two predicate is one
that you can answer by asking. Does there exist a y not
too much bigger than x, meaning polynomial that
does there exist a y, so that for all z, b of XYZ is true. Okay, so we can make that
mathematical generalization is very abstract. It's kind of hard to think at
this level of abstraction. Let's do an example. So here is a sigma p2 predicate P. So given a Boolean circuit C, well, circuits compute functions
and they output a yes or no. So they're predicate
type of functions. So they, they take some bits as
input and the output one bit. We want to ask the question, Is there a smaller circuit
computes the same predicates? So there's the questions. It's somehow about optimizing
the size of circuits. It's actually a very important
problem in, in VLSI design. So why is this a sigma two predicate? Well, the answer is yes. If what's true, what would have
to be true for there to be a smaller circuit computing
that same predicate. Well, there would have to
exist a circuit d whose size, maybe number of gates is that moat is strictly smaller
than the size of C. And they'd have to compute
the same function. Well, what does it mean for D and
C to compute the same function? Well, means for all inputs
w in 0, 1 to the n, The output C gives on w is the
same as the output D Giza, right? And you can always sort of stack
all the quantifiers in the front. So I wrote it the natural way where one of the things we're
saying doesn't involve w, it just involves DNC. So we can say, oh,
there's a circuit these smaller than sees that
all this is true. But you can always put all the quantifiers up front and it just becomes harder to
follow the sentence, but it's saying the same thing. There's a circuit D. So
that for all inputs, w, d is less than c. Okay? We didn't talk about W yet, but we will d is less than Zn. See if w equals DFW. Or put another way, it seems kind of redundant that for every single w we're going
to assert D is less than C. But it's, if it's true for one of
them, It's true for all of them. And so the exist for all right here kind of corresponds
to these two quantifiers. And then this predicate right here, it's a function of three inputs. The original input, see that we're asking about
that would be like X. The exists input, the
first exists input D, and then the for all input, which is w. And then
what's this predicate? Well, this predicate
is given three inputs, a circuit C, a circuit
D, and an input W. Is it the case that D is
size, smaller than c? And they compute the same
value on this one input. Well that's polynomial time. We just compare number
of gates. This is easy. And evaluating a circuit
on just one input, well, that can be done
easily in polynomial time. Okay, So the polynomial hierarchy is how we kind of generalize this. So this is the decision problem
that we just talked about. Given a Boolean circuit C, we want to answer
the yes-no question. Is there a smaller circuit? Now, the real optimization
problem we're interested in is finding
a smaller circuit, find the smallest circuit
computed in the same function. But as we've alluded, solving this decision problem. It has to be at least as hard. And in fact, if we could solve it, we could, we could
solve the optimization. So this corresponded to
ask him exists for all. And then polynomial-time
predicate type of question. Now, the negation of
this right, through it, the answer to this is no, that's true if c is actually the
smallest circuit computing fancy. So smallest Boolean
circuit is the negation or smaller Boolean circuit
and the a or the complement. We think about these as sets. So the complements of problems in sigma p2 form a class called py p2. And so if we think of
NP is being sigma P1, there's just one quantifier
out in front and it's exists and co-NP is Pi P1 and there's one quantifier and it's
for all and the Sigma and Pi are because exist is kinda like Boolean OR which is kind
of like the addition. And then pi is kind of like a product which is
kinda like Boolean end, which is kind of like for all that, you know, it's just a notation. So the Pi corresponds to for all. So this set of compliments
here is this, well, if we extend that sigma p2, the set of all complements of
things and sigma two is pi v2. And what would it mean to take
a complement of one of these? It would mean you'd put
a negation in front. But if you pass the negation through it flips the exist for all the, for all to this. And then finally, you just negate
a polynomial-time predicate, you get another
polynomial-time predicate. So that's why negating one of
these gives you 10 things. And you can extend this. You can say, well, you can have exists for
all exists or for all, exists for all and so on. And that gives you all these others and that set of all
these possible classes, this is called the
polynomial-time hierarchy. The hierarchy you get by
stacking successively more exist or for all
alternating quantifiers in front of some polynomial time. So another way to think about these, I sometimes find this
useful is as a tree where each sort of edge you following the tree is one
of these quantifiers. And so an exists tree is asking does their IRS IEPs are
each edge corresponds to, sorry, a, a non-deterministic decision when you're doing a
non-deterministic computation. So suppose this is all the
non-deterministic choice as your egg. So if we view that nondeterministic
machine as an NP machine, we're asking, does there exist
a computation path that accent? Now if we view it as a co-NP
machine, we're asking, is it the case that all possible
computation paths, et cetera. So black arrow means except
green means download. So we would say one of these
steps if any of its leaves, except we would say for all n, for all nondeterministic
machine accepts only all of its leaves represent an
accepting computation path. A sigma p2 tree would be exists
for all who would ask, well, does there exist some subtree here so that for all leaves in
the subtree their true. So it would kind of look like this. An exists for all exists tree
would look kind of like this. And a for all exists
for all of the great, This is it the case that
for all children here, there is a child below there such that for all children
below there, it's true. So you can kind of think of these
being characterized by Howard, the leaves colored to
say you except okay, so these pair of classes, sigma p2 and pi v2, again, we call those the kth level
of the polynomial hierarchy. One other way to think about
these is in some sense they're like two player
games that last for Kb. So why do I say that? Well, if I claim we're plates a chess and I
said I have checkmate in KMT. What does it mean to
say I have checkmate means I can win.
Well, why can I went? Because there's a move I can make. So that no matter what you do, for all moves my opponent could make. There could be many,
but for all of them, There's another move
I can make so that no matter what they do
in response to that, there's a move I can make
and so and so forth and so forth for k moves,
at the end of which, no matter what moves
the opponent made, if I made the right one and response
and take the opponents king. And so in some sense, you can't really characterize having
checkmate of an NP predicate. But checkmate in K moves can be characterized as K
alternating quantifiers, where the for all are necessary to capture that my opponent
is going to try as hard as they can to it and pick
the best move for them.-e 

en-ECS 220 4a_6.1-2 observations about the polynomial hierarchy and the great collapse.txt

Okay, so let's make a
few simple observations of the polynomial hierarchy now they don't look simple when
we write them out in this abstract mathematical notation. But we can use our intuition to see. So first of all, adding a
quantifier adds more power, but it can't reduce it, right? Just like every problem
in NP is also in NP. Because if you have a fair or if you have a way to
solve the problem, you certainly have
a way to verify it. Well, similarly, adding the quantifier can't reduce
your ability to do anything. So each one of these is
contained in the next level. Because each one of these is
defined by simply something that the previous level with one extra
quantifier put on the front. So the second observation is that exist adds this kind of
layer of non-determinism, asking whether there's
a witness that makes the next statement true, right? So in analogy to modifying P with
this non-determinism to get NP, we can say that sigma k, p is the nondeterministic version of Pi at the next smallest level, p. So in other words, C, right? So we have a circuit, C is
in smaller Boolean circuit. Alright, What does that mean? It means there's a smaller circuit D, then see that computes
the same thread of it. Right? And that is what
Cohen be predicate to say. But you got scene, you got D, and you want to ask the question, do they compute the same function? Well, they compute the same
function if for all inputs x, C of x equals b of x, right? They give the same answer that, so that for all predicate
is a co-NP predicate. So in particular, if we just define for the sake of a base
case that sigma 0, p and pies or OP or just p. Well, we have Sigma 1, P is NP, we add an axis to p, we get NB. But, and generally we
can say that Pi KP, it, meaning the compliment of
sigma KP and Sigma KP is, is covered or not, sorry,
not the complement of the set of complements
of problems in the air. Since negating epsilon or negating exists gives
for all and vice versa. So in other words, why is this true? Well, let's just see an example. It's not the case, right? So we're going to negate
something room air or set theoretically take the
complement of something. Here. C is the smallest
Boolean circuit, right? That's a Pi to Pi P2 predicate. The smallest booleans are good computing its function
That's not true. If and only if. What? Well, what, let's just replace
sees the smallest Boolean circuit. What does that mean? It
means for every circuit D, There's some input that it
gives a different answer on IE, they don't commute
the same predicate. So if d is smaller, then it gets a different
answer on that W. And that's saying, if it's smaller than they get
a different answer is equivalent to just saying, well, either D is at least as big
or they give a different answer. Right? And we can say, well, it's not the case that
for all circuits D there is a w that makes this true. If and only if there is a circuit D, so that for all inputs
w, this is not true. And then now we pass the not through, not this or this is equivalent
to not this and not this. In other words, there's a
circuit D for all inputs W I, D is less than c, and
c of w equals d of w. Which as we said, is what
it means to say there's a smaller circuit that
computes PC, right? So this kind of chain of reasoning, I could substitute any Boolean
predicate I want over here. This would still all
kind of fall for it. So there's just an example to help illustrate by taking
the compliment of something in sigma KP gives
you something and PyGame. Okay, So the polynomial hierarchy sometimes refers to like this
infinite sequence of the sets. Sometimes it refers to their union. So if you union together
all the sigma KP's, it's the same as all
the pie KP's because each one of them is
contained in the next level. So with no quantifier, you get p at the bottom. And then P is contained in NP and
it's also contained and co-NP. And we can call those the
first level of the hierarchy. Each of those is contained in the two sets at the
next level, and so on. And you get this infinite
hierarchy going up like this. Okay, so there's the whole
polynomial hierarchy. Okay, So would that defined? Now we can come back to
this tesco consequence that I think bronchus Volcker
Strassen referred do, which is the Great Collapse. All right, so what does the Great
Collapse and complexity theory? It's this, it's that if p is ND, again, as a consequence,
we don't think happens. Rephrasing this in terms of two
things we think don't hold. So if P is equal to NP, well then in fact, p is equal to
the whole polynomial hierarchy. The whole thing collapses down
to just the zeroeth level. So in other words, if one
existential quantifier somehow doesn't have any power to
the computational power BI, the neither do any additional
for all or exists quantifiers. So let's see why this is true. And therefore this
should be even more surprising than thinking P is
equal to nb because it means like, Oh wow, if you could do
this, which seems unlikely, you could do all this
other stuff which it has to be mathematically
even more unlikely. So we're going to repeatedly use these two facts that hold if
we assume p is equal to NP. So if P is equal to NP, then for any predicate that takes two inputs to be like
a verifier, the XW. This predicate is also in P. This is a one input predicate and
it's just the, the NP predicate, the one that oninput just x asked, does there exists a W sub b? So this thing is an NP, but if they're equal, it's also NP. Okay? So in other words, you could put it exists on the front of anything computable in polynomial time that will also be
computable in polynomial. And remember, if P equals NP, it also equals co-NP. So this predicate, what also the NPV. If you have any polynomial
predicate B of two inputs, you can put a for all quantifier
and the second input, that whole thing would also be NP. So let's do this by concrete example. Suppose we have this
sigma P3 predicate. What does it mean? It means you have a polynomial time computable predicate,
taking four inputs, x and then witness one, witness to an S3, B3. We're asking the question
on input x, is there a w1? So for all W2, W3, that makes B3 true. So we're repeatedly going to
ultimately use these facts. So by fact E, this means like exists. Just this last part asking does there exists a W three
to make this true? This right is a function
of three inputs, x w1, W2. And it's asking, does there exist a fourth input to make all OB3 true? Well, that's NP. So we can replace that, which is this thing we'll call b2, which doesn't have the exists. We can just directly compute
it in polynomial time. And now we can notice
what ends in something that looks like a co-NP predicate, but those are also NP. So this can be computed
in polynomial time. Let's call that thing BY
want to just x and w. It can answer the question. Given these two, is it the case
that for all w to this holds? And then now we get an exists
and a polynomial-time predicate. By fact E, that's also in P. So in fact, a of x is just
computable in polynomial time. By this predicate, we'd all be 0. So a is NP. So we took an arbitrary
element of sigma P3, showed it's in P. So
these two are equal. And hopefully it's obvious how
to extend this to more levels. So now what if np equals co-NP? So an exercise that we may or may not ask and the
homework is to show that would imply np equals the whole
polynomial hierarchy. Which means that collapses
to the first level, maybe not all the way
down to the ground floor, but a collapses to the first floor. So this doesn't necessarily
imply that P equals NP, but it still seems very unlikely to think about what would have to be true if P and NP were different, but NP and co-NP with the same, it would mean that adding
a single exists or for all quantifier would increase
your computational power, right? Because you'd actually get something more by adding an exists to get nb. But then somehow adding as many more quantifiers on top of that as you want would
not increase it. So this is evidence that
we don't really think any problem in both NP and
co-NP is NP-Complete, right? Like there's certain
problems related to factoring that are in
both of those that we, maybe they got hard. But we don't actually they are
NP complete because if they were that would imply
np equals co-NP. And we think that this
collapse can't happen.-e 

en-ECS 220 4a_6.1-3 collapse propagates up padding technique.txt

Okay, so let's look at another
consequence of P equals NP, which again, doesn't prove
that they're unequal. But it establishes that some even more surprising things
would happen if they were, gives us evidence that
they're not equal. So the textbook says a common misconceptions that P
versus NP is about polynomial time. But it's really a
question about the power of non-determinism in general. Whether finding
solutions is harder than checking them regardless
of how much time we have. So in this section we're going to show if they're equal, then in fact, the problem is decidable in time T are equal to the problems
decidable in time. Non-deterministically
decidable in time t for essentially any class of functions t that grows
at least polynomially. So recall that XP is the problem is decidable and exponential time, or time looks something
like two to the end. The sum constant, like
two to the n cubed, two to the end of the tenth. And then NX is similar except
with a non-deterministic machine. And this is question, is x equal
to NX? Well, we don't know. But what we're going to show
is that if P and NP are equal, well then so are these. And really, as this is
anything kind of above it, but we're going to,
we're going to use exponential just to be concrete
because it'll be easier. And this is a very
nice proof technique which can be useful in other
areas called padding, right? So if you hear me talking
about the padding proof technique, It's this. So we have to show if P is NP, then x equals and x, and x is clearly a subset of X. So in other words, we have to show assuming P equals NP, x is a subset of X. So we'll pick an arbitrary
a and an XP and show we can get rid of the
non-determinism and decide it deterministically
in exponential time. So because it's an annex, there's a, say two to the n cubed. Now maybe not MQ, maybe end of
the fifth, maybe end of the 100. But for some constant up here, Let's just use cubed to be concrete. There's a predicate decidable
in this amount of time be XW, so that a of x is true if and only if there is a W of an
appropriate length bound, because this is exponential time, we're going to allow
exponentially large witnesses. So that b of x w is true. That's the definition of n x. Okay, So let's think
about the problem that we're going to define called SI, see is the so-called patent problem. So the input to see is a
binary string of length, and we'll call it. And then a urinary string
of length k minus n. So n is simply this
number given to us. It's going to be something like
the length of this X up here. And then k is going to be arbitrary, but we'll use it on
particular values of k. The first question
we're going to ask is, is it the case that k is
equal to 2 to the n cubed? In other words, we want to
know this whole string, but together you just
concatenated x and p. Would that whole thing
equal 2 to the n cubed? If n is the length of x here, if not, we're just
going to reject, right? We just want to say now, we're only going to consider inputs
where k has this exponential, is exponentially bigger than that. But if so, the question we're
going to ask about this input is, is there a W of length k, where k is the difference
between n cubed and n. So that b of x w is true. So is not really a question
about P here, right? So there's two inputs, x
and p, but all we've used, P4 is just to get past
this first gate here, verify the length is correct. Now all we want to do is just
ask this question about X and W, where W is going to be
quite a bit bigger tax. So here's like a representative
example of how these look. Log p, The new areas, just a bunch of ones. X is some binary string
we want to know, is there a W of this huge length that makes B of this x comma this W true. So here's a
non-deterministic algorithm that can solve this problem, sees an artificial problem. It's not really useful. It's just going help us
get this proof-of-work. But here's an algorithm to solve it. It will non-deterministically guess w of the right length
that takes time k. We just generate bits
k times in a row. Now we, now B is decidable in
exponential time two to the n cubed. So run the decider for B on x and
w. Now that you've guessed w, How much time does that take? Well, it takes two to the n cubed, but k is 2 to the n cubed. So another way of saying
that is it takes time k, This length that's quite
a bit bigger than x, but it's actually by definition, the length of our
entire input, right? So season, but size is K. N is like the input to this, this first input to be
that K is the input to C. So C is actually solvable in
nondeterministic linear time, right? This time linear in c is
input the lot bigger than x, but x is not the whole input. The input is x NP together. So this padding essentially means C runs pretty fast as a
function of its input size. It's pretty slow as a function
of the designer for B. But, but it's laying around. And remember we assume
p is equal to NP. So in fact, see is not only solvable in nondeterministic
linear time, it's decidable in polynomial time. Maybe we need more than linear, but the polynomials are all
kinda equivalent in here. So because it's an NB, it's also in P. So there's a
polynomial time algorithm for z. So here's a deterministic
algorithm for a. Remember a is solvable in
nondeterministic exponential time. Now we want to show we can solve it in deterministic exponential time. We're going to use this
deterministic algorithm that exists for C,
that's polynomial time. So how do we, how do we determine if a of x is true on
input x of length, then compute C of what? Well, the first input is x, the second input is enough ones to make the entire length
2 to the n cube, which means to the n cube
minus the n bits over an x. So Season P, which means there's a polynomial
time algorithm for this. It's polynomial time in
the length of the input. To see, again, we're kinda do a
lot of things jumping around here, but how big is the input to see? It's this number k, it's n plus k minus
n, So it's just k. And k is 2 to the n cubed, right? So if we're polynomial in case
they were k to the fifth, that means or two to the
n cubed to the fifth, which is two to the five n cubed. So that's a bigger exponential, that's still exponential
and AES input leg. But that's a deterministic algorithm. So in fact, a unsolvable
deterministically in exponential time.-e 

en-ECS 220 4b_6.1-1 time constructible functions.txt

Now the last proof we did, as we often do, we left
out a few details. And one of the details we
didn't really spell out was that we assumed that when we want to run some program that runs for
a certain amount of time that we can first calculate
how much time it runs for. So in other words, what we did was we
wrote down on input x, the pair X comma 1 and T of n
minus n copies of one, right? In other words, we assume
we can take string. We started with an
extended to be length T of n or T was the time-bounded
we were concerned. So that assumes we can calculate T and then given n.
But what if T of n is itself a computationally
difficult function that cannot be computed
in time 0, t of n. Now that wasn't true of
the function we had. It was like two to the n cubed. And if we were dealing with
the different XP machine, it would have been 2 to the
n to some other constant. Those can be computed, but in time linear in
the time-bound itself. But what if you had a
function like this, a time-bound T of n
equals say two times, then if the nth Turing machine
halts and it's one otherwise. So whether it's even or odd could tell you about the halting problem. This is not even a
computable function. Now if you allow really
pathological time-bound, not exactly this one,
but if you allow pathological time-bound such as this, then it's possible to prove very pathological theorems such
as there is a time-bound t of n, such that time of T of n equals time of two to
the two to the two to the t. So we're simply going to disallow such
functions as time bounds. And we're going to
formally define a function T that takes as input
a natural number, outputs a natural number
to be time constructable. If there's a program that on input will say one to the n and so on, on input, a string of
the length we care about for our time-bound but not the string our machine is going to process. We just want to know how
long is that string. And so you write down and copy
the one you want to be able to compute the number t of n
in at most t of n steps. And this is true of basically every time-bound we tend to talk about. And n squared two to the n, 2 to the n squared, et cetera. But subsequently from
now we're going to assume all time-bound are
actually time constructable. So we don't get these sort of
pathological results like about-e 

en-ECS 220 4b_6.1-2 relation of NP to finding mathematical proofs.txt

So I want to talk a bit about
mathematical proofs. Now. We're asking you in homework
to give some proofs. But, and we tell you
it'll be precise, be as formal as you can. But we don't really mean
formal mathematical proof in the way that
logicians talk about it. So what exactly is a
formal mathematical proof? It's not the things we
usually write back. Well, you know what I tend
to call a proof that I put in my writing and
my research papers. What I asked you to do on
the homework is just write down some sentences so
that somebody intelligent, but who didn't see why the
theorem is true before, reads it. Well now they do see why
it's true that to me that's, that's what a convincing proof is. But when we talk the way logicians do about formal
mathematical proofs, we tend to take that and demand
and we go to weigh more level of detail such that a computer
program could verify it. So technically a formal
mathematical proof is a series of simple steps. Each one of them apply in
either an axiom that you just assume without proving our a theorem, which is a statement
that you conclude from a series of simple
step from the axioms. So for example, you might remember these horrible things from high
school, these geometric proofs. So here's one of them stating that the angle a PC equals the angle BPD. And then there's the proof
of it that comes from the axioms or do you tend to call
them postulates in geometry? And you just apply each of them. And again, I'm showing you
this just to say, okay, there is technically a way to
formalize mathematical proofs. Some cruel high school teachers may have forced you to do
it with geometry and taken an extremely obvious statement
like this angle equals this angle and then pretended like it's not obvious and that you
have to prove this. And actually one of
my favorite essays about mathematics is called a mathematician's element
by Paul locker, I suggest you go read it. It's very good. But he uses this as an example of how high-school geometry students should not be thinking about
proofs and says this about it. So I agree with him about that. However, when you want
to formally study logic, right now, when you want to do, just do mathematics are just
figure out what's true and false. But when you want to formally study logic and asked me what
does it postulate? What, what is possible
to prove in principle? What's possible to know about the
mathematical world in principle, then you do have to formalize it. And this is what we mean
by proof in that context. Okay? So when we're talking
about proofs that can be processed by a computer or verified by a computer will checking proofs like that is
tedious, but it's simple. You just verifying that each
statement either is an axiom or it follows by one of your rules of deduction from the previous
statements that you've proved. So here's a statement that sort of, once you kinda get that definition
in your head, is kind of, is obviously solvable
in polynomial time, which is given a mathematical
statement and a proof of it, you want to ask the question,
is P a valid proof of S? Right? And this is what
proof checkers do. I mean, this is what
the systems like, like Coke do that. And are able to verify formerly written proofs is
they just apply the rules of deduction and verify that each step follows from
one of the previous ones. So because this problem, it takes these two inputs. And remember our definition of NP, we had one input for the
problem we care about in a second one for the verifier
that was the witness. That because this problem is in P, This one is an NP where you're given essentially only the statement. It's actually an
optimization problems. Like all optimization problems
we have the input we care about, and then a threshold to turn the optimization problem
into a decision problem. So the optimization problem
is given radical statement. Does it have what's the
shortest proof of it? But phrased as a decision problem, we can ask, does it have a
proof of length n or less? And the NP, the verifier for this is the algorithm for this
state, this problem up here. So, so it's in NP. I'm going to claim it's
actually NP complete. Pause and think about that. Actually don't pause. I
won't talk about it here, but asked about it if
you want to later. So how would you show that the Boolean satisfiability problem is polynomial-time reducible to
this short proof problem. So this sort of idea leads us to
the third grotesque consequence. If P equals NP, that makes us think they're
probably not equal. And it would be the complete
demise of mathematical creativity. So write down any unsolved
mathematical problem, Goldbach's conjecture,
the Riemann hypothesis, or any of those $1
million clay problems. Where, you know, for
the clay problems, you're going to get a million
dollars if you prove it. But there's probably no
human on earth who's going to prove it with a proof that
has more than a billion steps. I mean, they can try it,
it probably won't ever find this if they did, and they published a several
gigabyte text document proving it, nobody would ever be
able to verify it. So if give you expect to in practice, be able to solve one
of these problems and convince other people it solved. You will probably come up
with a, a short proof, a proof with a billion
steps service. Okay. And you know, any
human written proof, even if you took the
thing we normally call, Approve and tediously expand
at the formal detail. So it's one of these machine verifiable formal proofs is going
to be less than a billion steps. So in other words, all of mathematics could be automated
because if P equals NP, NP-complete problems, short proof
that can answer this question, that, that would have a
polynomial time algorithm. Okay, with machine learning, maybe this is going to happen anyway. But, but, you know, but like most machine learning, we probably wouldn't be
correct on all inputs, so I wouldn't know how
much we want to trust. So this isn't just mathematics, most scientific fields, right? If you really pull your gaze back and try to say
what do they all have in common? Well, they repeatedly trying
to solve this problem. Given some set E, experimental data. For example, astronomical
observations, say of where the planets are each night and an integer t. And again, for technical reasons, we'll
put it in the urinary. We will want to find is a theory t, for example, Kepler's laws of planetary motion of length n
or less, that explains it. You can run other
words, we want to find a short set of rules that
explain these observations. So if P were NP, this is what the textbook has to say. No longer would we need
a Kepler to perceive elliptical orbits or a Newton to
guess the inverse square law. Fighting these theories
becomes just as easy as checking that
they fit the data. And that seems very counterintuitive. This doesn't prove P is not NP. But I think this constitutes very strong evidence
that they're not equal. We don't actually think
creativity is this easy. Okay? So there's other reasons to
believe that P is not NP. I've strongly recommend
this blog post by Scott Aronson called
reasons to believe. And he had another one later. The scientific case
for p not equal to NB. That said, not all theoretical
computer scientists are so convinced. **** Lipton is chief among them. He likes to remind us repeatedly
the fact that we don't have a proof is evidence
that maybe it's true. And he thinks we should consider very seriously the possibility
that there is a polynomial algorithm for
something like satisfiability. But we just need vast sort of advancements in our understanding of algorithms to be able to do it. And yeah, that wouldn't be surprising because we clearly
need vast advances in our understanding to prove that sad is not going to eat because they haven't been
able to do that either. So certainly resolving this question requires that we figure out
someone we don't know yet.-e 

en-ECS 220 4b_6.2 upper bounds versus lower bounds.txt

So it's common to hear
theoretical computer scientists make this observation that upper bounds are easy and
lower bounds are hard. And it's a little bit
of inside terminology there usually when a
theoretical computer scientist says upper-bound, they tend to mean showing that
a problem has an algorithm, like I'd say, an efficient algorithm. Meaning we are, what,
what's the thing? We're putting an upper bound on the computational difficulty
of the algorithm, right? So it's a very jargony
way of phrasing it, but it just means showing
a problem does have say, a fast algorithm or a
space sufficient them. Whereas lower-bound to a theoretical
computer scientists DS domain showing a problem cannot be solved
by some class of algorithm, meaning placing a lower bound on
its computational difficulty. So for example, showing a
problem is NP-complete. Assuming P is not NP, that is placed in a lower-bound and saying no polynomial time
algorithm can solve that problem. So when I say upper bounds are easy, what they mean is coming up
with an algorithm to solve a problem tends to be easier than showing that
there is no algorithm. And the idea is somehow like because you have to do less
work and in some sense. So to show a problem is
in P, we need quote, only find a single polynomial
time algorithm for it, right? It doesn't matter what all those other polynomial
time algorithms would do. And the fact that they would be, if you ran them on an instance of
this problem, they'd be wrong. You just need one algorithm that works for this problem
and you're done. Whereas to show a lower bound, to show that the
problem is not empty, you need to argue about every
possible polynomial-time algorithm and why it gets the answer wrong. So in some sense, this is like why people tend to equip
an upper bounds are easier because you only
have to reason about one algorithm finding
it may not be easy, but once you have it, you
just have to show it works. But for this, you have to show every possible polynomial
time algorithm does not work. So in an algorithms class, you learn about all sorts
of techniques for trying to make algorithms polynomial time, make them faster than
just brute force search. We don't have quite as
many techniques for these lower bounds,
but we have a few. So let's look now at a few techniques we do have for proving lower bounds. In other words, for showing
that a certain problem has no algorithm within a certain sort of complexity resource constraints. So my favorite example of
this is the first one I ever learned when I was an undergrad
in my algorithms course. I don't think I really appreciated
at the time, but they, they kinda gave us a glimpse of it and it was very fascinating to me. So we learned, you know, the naive sorting algorithms
like the one that you would probably come up
with your first term, you took a programming class. They tend to be quadratic
time, right thing. Most people, if they're
asked to come up with a sorting algorithm when they
finally get it, we're again, it's probably one of
the insertion sort or bubble sort or one of the, the slower sorting algorithms. Then you learned about these much
faster algorithms that take time n log n. And for this
little section here, we're not going to
consider everything polynomial time to be
equally fast here. We really care that, yeah, n log n is really
faster than n squared. And it's slower than O of n. So when you learn that
you can get rid of, that, you can turn one of the ends
and n squared into a log of n, which is looking just at that term. It's a very strong reduction in
the complexity of that term. You might ask, what
can you do better? Like can we get, say, a linear
time algorithm for sorting? So for here we get a
formalize a little better. What do we mean by sorting? So here's the task and an assortment. Remember in, in this
course we just consider inputs to be binary strings, right? We often talk about them like
they're more structured data, but under the hood they're
all binary strings. So if I tell you sorted X is this input that we
represent in binary. You don't quite know
what I mean, right? Because I have to tell you
how is the data structured? Does it represent a list of three bit integers and they're
all the same number of bits. So we can just concatenate
the bits and not have to remember the boundaries like so here ir integers between 07 and sorting them from here would
make them look like this is a two bit symbols, like maybe they represent DNA bases. And then we would sort of like this. Is it. That's, I want to
sort the bed semana, just put all the ones at the end. So it kinda matters. So to get this lower bound
we're going to talk about, we're going to make a little
bit of an assumption here. So it's not going to be a
lower bound that applies to every possible algorithm
you could be talking about. It's one that assumes you can't see the bits that encode the array. So what do I mean by
you can't see the beds? What I mean is that, you know
that somehow this input x, it encodes an array. But you can actually look inside of it and see the data
that composes each one. All you have is access to a comparator function that you
give two indices, I and j. And it tells you is the ith
item less than the J type. And that's not such a
terribly strong assumption that every sorting
algorithm nearly that we learn about tends to be like because it tends to
be that they don't much care what is the data
inside each array element. All they do quicksort, heapsort, insertion
sort, bubble sort. All they do is they just repeatedly
pick pairs of elements in the array and they don't look at
fully detailed into the data. They just asked these two elements which one's bigger based on that, you know what to do next. So this is a so-called
black box comparison. So if we want to reason only about these kinds
of sorting algorithms, which is nearly all
the ones you study. These are all black-box swords and so are most of the
others and learn about. We can prove unconditionally, we don't need anything
like assume P is not NP. We're going to show
black-box sorting algorithms require omega of n log n comparisons. So there's some constant. And the constants going to turn
out to be pretty close to one. But it means there's some constants
so that you need at least that constant times n log n comparisons
to get these things sorted. So how do we show that? So
every sorting algorithm for each possible length n of the list you want to sort has an associated decision
tree describing the items. Then it's going to compare. No matter what is
the length and list. So we, you imagine
what happens is you do some computation and at some
point you ask, is a less than b? So here I'm using a, B, and C to refer to the element that's initially
in the first position. B is the element
initially in the second, C is initially and maybe
they get shuffled around. But when I ask is like a less than b, it means is the element that started in position
one less than that, that the, the element, they're less than the element that
started at position two. So you ask this and then if yes, maybe you do some more
computation of no, you do some different computation. And then maybe the next black
box comparison as you ask, is b less than c If you want left? And if so, maybe you now conclude there already
in the right order, a is less than b is less than c.
And you can see that would be the appropriate comparison
if a is less than b and b is less than c
there in the right order. But if not, you do, maybe
do some more computation. Maybe you now ask, is a less than c? And at this point the answer is yes, this is the proper order. So you should put them in order acb, otherwise you do CAB. And this is abstracting away
like what other computation happens besides just
doing the comparison. So who knows how much
computation happens here, we're going to show that
even if the computation represented by these
arrows was instantaneous, still the total number of comparisons you have to do
is going to be n log n. So we don't worry so much
about what the computation is. We just know you do some
comparisons and when you're done, you reached a sort of leaf
of this decision tree. And that tells you how to
rearrange these elements. So if the initial answer was no, we maybe do some more
comparison and some more. And what we get is a tree. And the leaves, right, represents all the possible
sorted orders and ABC depending on how big they
are relative to each other. In other words, depending on the results of the answers
to these questions. And there's three elements. So there's three factorial
which is 3 times 2 is 6. There's six different
orders of these. And so there ought to be at least six different leaves here to represent all the
possible different orders. This could be sorted in depending on the relative comparisons
we get between a, B, and C. So each list of length and traverses some branch
of this tree, right? If you change the values, but you didn't change the
answers to these questions, it would traverse the same branch. But if you swap the relative order, it means you'll take a different
turn somewhere in this tree. And now we ask, okay, we want to know the
worst-case running time on any list of length that this
is the question we ask. Most often. What's the worst-case running time? Well, the worst-case running time, or at least the worst case
number of comparisons. We just assume that somehow these arrows represent
instantaneous computation. But the worst case number of comparisons we have
to do is the depth of this tree is the longest path
from the leaf to any rate. So how many leaves are in the tree? Well, it's going to be
at least n factorial. Again, in this example, there's one leaf per
possible permutation of ABC. But maybe you got a
inefficient algorithm. Maybe, some of these leaves repeat. Maybe a being less than b, b, a less than c, less than
b shows up twice here. But you have to have each
permutation appear at least once to represent what if
that is the sorted order? So the leaves are going to
be at least n factorial. And what do we know about binary
tree is that the depth of a binary tree is at least a
log of the number of leaks. And a log of n factorial
is theta of n log n. I think I had you do
that on the homework 0. So in other words, the depth of this tree is
going to be at least n log n. And this shows that even if all of the computation is instantaneous, still just the number of comparisons you have to do is at least n log n. So of course, the
running time is going to involve doing comparisons
and some other stuff. So the running time also
has to be at least n log n. So this shows a bound and the information needed to
determine the proper sorted order. And uses that to get
this running time. Now that said, this is only for a
particular class of algorithms, those that do blackbox sorting that
their only access to the data. It inside the list is just
comparing pairs of items. But sometimes the boxes
aren't really black. So like radix sort, for instance, this consort and integers, if they're each embeds
in time O of n times m. Now all the integers are distinct, then you can do a
counting argument to show that most of them require
at least log of n bits. And this would be an
n log n algorithm. But you can have duplicates, right? And that's precisely
when radix sort is a lot faster than these
other algorithms, is like say you have a huge list, but all it has is just the
digits 0 through nine. Then you can sort it in
time O of N times 10, right? No matter how big n. Or to think about an even faster one, what if you're just
sorting bets, Right? The only have two
possible elements to 01. And so you can ask a
more stringent question. And given two elements which
is bigger, you can ask, actually ask, is this
element 0 or is it one? And you can assume it's one of those do and think for a bit when you're on how to come up with a linear time sorting algorithm, it's
pretty straightforward. So radix sort looks inside
the box at the bits. So a black box analogy for some of the other problems we've thought
about like 3-sat would be this. If a 3 CNF formula may only be black box queried with
test assignments, right? For example, you can
give an assignment, you can ask, does this
make it true or not? But you can't examine the clauses. You don't, you know, you know that somehow it's a three CNF formula. You don't know how
many clauses, as you don't know where the literals are. All you can do is just give it
a potential assignment and say, Okay, try to set a equal to one
and b equals to 0 and so forth. And it can tell you, does
that make it true or false? It's pretty clear to see
that in the worst case, you have to test all possible
two to the n assignments. You're getting no information out of that formula other
than for each input. Is it true or false? So all you're going do is just come up with
assignments and give it. And whatever your algorithm does, it gives them in some order. So if you make the formula, depend on the algorithms so that there is one
satisfying assignment, the last one that the algorithm test, then it would require two to
the n time to render a law. Now, 3-sat is not in
fact a black box though. There are algorithms
based on looking at the clause structure that
run faster than that. So for example, there's a
still exponential time, but not this really bad exponential. It's a slightly better exponential
running time for something based on the idea that
we can learn something about the formula through the
structure of the clauses.-e 

en-ECS 220 4c_6.3-1 problems not in P and a natural problem in EXP - P.txt

So we're going to get into trying to show that certain
problems are not in P. Now, big conjecture is whether
NP is not equal to BA, and that would mean all those NP
complete problems are not NP. Most of the problems we encounter in the real world
that we want to solve quickly, but we don't know how they
turn out to be NP-complete. So we don't yet have any techniques
for proving they're not NP, but we do have some techniques for proving certain
problems are not empty. So let's just look now. Not at what we want to prove, but at the tools we have
which are insufficient. So proving a particular
problem is not NP is tough if you to animate
something like sat, right? And asked me, show that
there's no algorithm for this. That's tough. But one thing that's quite a
bit easier is if you don't have a problem And in mind and
advance that you care about. You just want to demonstrate
that there is some problem. Outside of p. You can just artificially construct one and it's not a natural problem. You care about solving. It just demonstrates something about the structure of these
complexity classes. So the trick, even when you're
artificially construct in an unnatural problem
is to ensure that the problem remains and some
other complexity glass. So in this case here, we're going to use which is
bigger than NP we think. But we aren't going to actually show unconditionally that x is not equal to p by showing there's a
problem in EXP, but not be. Now, as I said, it's
going to be artificial. This won't tell us whether
any natural problem is in XP, but not be. Although I'm going to
point out that there are some problems that are natural there, but we're not going to show it there. A little tougher to show. The more generally, we're going
to show that time of T of n, the problem solvable
in o of t then time is a strict subset of time of f of x. Whenever f grows at a rate
quote sufficiently larger than. So the way this is often
summarized is with more time, you can compute more. So in other words, computational complexity theory
is actually worth study. There's something to
be discovered here. This whole alphabet soup of all these different
complexity glasses is not simply a 1000
different names for Pete. So this is actually more or less
the first theorem proved in computational complexity theory in the mid 1960s that kicked
the whole thing off. Okay, so let's start by
just observing that there is a natural problem solvable
in exponential time, but not in polynomial time. We're not going to prove this, but this is a problem
with the little easier to tell a problem we might
actually want to solve. So here's this problem. We haven't given a name too, Yeah, but we've kind
of talked about it. It's called Circuit value. And this is simply given a Boolean circuit that takes an input and an
assignment to its inputs. So a particular binary string
to give the circuit isn't, but is it one? Alright? So I'm going to say this
is obviously NB, right? You can just trace through each
of the inputs, look at the gates, they're connected to evaluate
the values of those gates, then go to the next layer of the circuit and so on until
you have the output value. So let's now think about a different
way of representing circuits. So let's imagine that you have of
not a surrogate written out in full detail listing all the gates and circuits are essentially
directed graph. Absolutely. We define them as
directed acyclic graphs. So rather than a normal graph
representation where you explicitly list every node u
explicitly list every edge. Let's imagine instead
that way you have is a polynomial time algorithm, AAC. So it's an algorithm for CE. And it succinctly
represents the circuit, meaning it takes as input an integer I write and you imagine each of
the gates can be numbered. Maybe gate number two is
input to gate number five. Is this not gate, gate
number eight is the output. So this takes us input this index for a gate and what
an output, this two things. First of all, the type of
the gate isn't an end or, or is it an input? And it also indicates
essentially the edges. So it just gives the indices of n neighbors and
our neighbors of gay. But, and so if you were
to run this algorithm for all the I represented
indices of gates, you could construct this explicitly
listed representation of it. But this algorithm, when you consider how many bits you need to just
write down the algorithms. In Python, it might be much
smaller than the circuit itself. You might have some
extremely regular circuit. And it's a very big circuit, but it can be described by
a very small algorithm. So not all circuits are that way, but some circuits are regular enough that just the algorithm
itself will take a lot fewer bits to write
down than the circuit that would be output if you ran
the algorithm on every input. So this is called succinct because
it's sort of potentially says. So here's the problem
we're going to think about is this variant
of circuit value. So again, your whole
goal is just given a circuit and an
assignment to evaluate it. If you're not given the
circuit explicitly, you're given this
succinct representation. So you're given an algorithm and you want to know what's
the value of the circuit. And because this circuit
can be much smaller, because the algorithm generating
the circuit can be much smaller. Legwork require many fewer bits to write down than
the circuit itself. Although the time needed to do this would roughly be the same
as the time needed to. Up here, they take
different size inputs. This one, the size of
the input is dominated by the explicit representation
of the circuit. If you had some algorithm for
producing the circuit gate by gate, and that algorithm was logarithmically smaller
than the circuit itself. Well then, although the time needed for each of these is
the same for that circuit, down here, the circuit is represented
with a much smaller input. And so the running time, as a function of the input
would be exponentially larger than the running time up here. So it can't be much more than
that for technical reasons, but that we won't get into. But, so the point is
this problem is in X, but that algorithm isn't necessarily polynomial time because you don't have this large input. Anybody might have
a very small input, but you take the same, the
amount of time to do that. And it turns out this thing is, you know, outside of PPE, we can prove that is something
called EXP complete, which we won't define, but
it's similar to NP-Complete. And in particular, it means that
this is an x minus set minus p. So we're not going to get too much
into this problem, be on this, but this is a problem that you, it's a little bit more natural
and it is, it is solvable. It is solvable in some time-bound
exponential time button, but provably not in polynomial
time on all possible inputs. And just in case you're wondering
the variant of this that looks more like the problems we had
been studying. Circuit SAT. Meaning given us a sink
representation of a circuit, you want to know, is there an
assignment that makes it true, that is NXP complete
as you might expect, going from the deterministic version to the nondeterministic version, the same way circuit
SAT is NP complete.-e 

en-ECS 220 4c_6.3-2 definition of artificial problem Catch22.txt

Okay, so now from, Let's go back from a natural problem that we're not going to get into. The proof of it being outside appeal to an artificial problem that's going to be a little
easier to reason about. And his whole goal is just
to show us that there's something in XP but not be. So let's let T be a
time-bound function. Remember we require these so-called
time constructable functions, but just think of t as being something like n
squared two to the n. So if you fix this function, you can define a decision problem. In this decision
problem depends on t is that he's not an input
to the function, is just the name of the
decision problem as t. So predict sub n squared would be a different decision problem
then predict sub 2 to the n. But for any time-bound, you can define this problem. The problem is on two inputs, a program P and an input
x we want to output. And let's assume that P. Just for the sake of concreteness, let's assume that if it halts, it returns a boolean, right? Maybe it's a, it's a Python function. And all the return
statements return that. We can generalize that. But let's just imagine. So what we want to output is
one of three different values. Yes, no, or I don't know apple. And if P of X halts with empty
of length of x, the hubs. In other words, if you know P on this input is actually
T of n time that bid, then we just want output whatever pietas which will be assembled
in an otherwise we want to help, but I don't know. Okay, so know that t is
hard-coded into predict, it's not an input to
write is just the definition of this problem depends on which team and it's a
different problem if we, if we change d. And note also that
this is an absolute boundary, so-called sharp boundary
are not asking doesn't halt with an o of t of x steps. That wouldn't necessarily be well-defined is we'd have
to say what the constant, so the constant is one
we want to note is all in exactly t times length. The next steps. Okay, so here's this artificial
problem that present. So first of all, this one
is not all that unnatural. This is some very
abstract distillation of the problem that all
static analysis solvers want to solve is they, they want to know if I
ran a program, you know, possibly on some particular inverter, possibly in any input. What's it going to do, right? We want to predict its behavior. So here's the artificial problem. So if we're given a
program P that happens to return a Boolean, right? If it returns are all, we want to output this weird value. And this value is if we ran
P on its own source code, right, to take strings as inputs. When I write p of p, What I mean is I want to
run the program P and the string I want to get it
is the source code of B. So the output of a catch-22
is going to be, okay, negate that whatever P would
do on its own input if it actually holds within t of
the input length steps. Then it returns some Boolean. In that case, I want the output of Catch-22 to be the
negation of that Boolean. Otherwise, I want the output of
Catch-22 to just say I don't know. Okay, so right here, this
is the source go to p. And this is sometimes called, this technique is
called diagonalization, and we're going to see it again. But here's our first
indication of it. The fact that we're giving P its own source code is why this technique is
called diagonalization. And it's because if you
imagine that you have this infinite matrix
where in the rows you list all possible programs
you might want to run. And the columns you list all possible inputs you
might want to give them. And then you get rid of
any inputs that don't look like source code of programs. Then all that remains is
source code of programs. And the portions of this matrix that we reference here in this problem
are the ones along the diagonal. So this is why this technique is
called diagonalization. Okay? So we've defined this program, this problem catch-22 sub t. Here's just a reminder that there's the statement
of the problem again. Okay, so now let's, let's reason about the
complexity of this problem. So, okay, for any program
P that halts on input P, meaning the source code to be
within t of length of P steps. Catch-22 sub T of p is
not equal to p and b. Right? So why is that? Well, just the definition is that if, if p on input B halts, right, that satisfies this catch-22
on that input is the opposite. So they're not the same. That's just how we've
defined it. Okay? So we want to reason about how quickly a
catch-22 sub t can be solved. So let's imagine program, we'll call it P sub 22. That's always catch-22. Right? So this problem can be
solved is not undecidable. It is solvable, but I want to reason about how much time does it take. Okay, So let's just let pet peeve 20 to be any program that solves
a correctly an island. That's right. Well then what does it mean? It means P 22 on input, P 22 on, on any input has got to get
the answer right for catch-22, which means it also works on its own. P20, two of P 22 gets
the answer right. This right here is the
definition of the answer. So that means they
cannot be the case by this definition that P2V2 halts
on it within this many steps, If it did catch-22, would not oninput P 22 would
not equal P2 to P1, P2. So catch-22 t, It could
still be solvable in say, three times T of n steps, right? But it is not solvable on all inputs within T event exactly
sharply T and n steps. So, so it could be in like time of t and m because this allows
constants times t-a then. But in particular, this does show for any g of n grows
strictly smaller than TIA, then this problem is
not in time of g. And so here is our time lower bound. And this, this problem that can be solved within
some amount of time, but not within T, T of n steps or smaller. If you care about sharp
bounds and if you're allowed to have constants in
front of the time-bound, then it's not solvable in
anything little o of t. Now this also essentially shows that, that more natural problem predict
sub t is not in time of g. So in general, this just a little more details
to kind of work that out. But in general, what that tells
us is that the fastest way to predict some programs T steps into the future is actually
to run them for t steps. There's no shortcuts. So most static analysis
solvers you can think of is trying to find shortcuts and say, well, what might this
program do without us having to run it and
see what it does? And, you know, there's a
lot of that work very well. But the point is they provably cannot possibly work on all
possible programs. So in general, you cannot predict
what computation's are going to do other than just by running
them and seeing what they did.-e 

en-ECS 220 4c_6.3-3 simulation slowdown and the Time Hierarchy Theorem.txt

Okay, so this artificial
problem, catch-22 t, is designed to be unsolvable by
every T of n time-bounded program. But it is solvable, right? I promised you that we're not
just going to show there's some problem outside of time of t, Then we're going to show it is
solvable in some bigger time. So how much time do I need
to solve? Catch-22 of t? Well, in order to solve it, right, what do we have to do? We have to know what
would in oninput p, What would do when run
on its own source code? And we don't even have to know
eventually we'll just have to know within t of length of P steps. So we could solve and eight and
then we just negate the answer. That's what Catch-22 it. So we could just simulate P, a P for this many steps. So it does not only take
TO length of P steps and contradict the fact that catch-22 T cannot be solved
and that many steps. So think about that for a second. Why? Why is that? So no, because the simulation
encourages a slowdown, right? We can't simulate P
for this many steps. In exactly that many steps, there's some slowdown
happening. How much? So this is where the details
get a little tricky. It depends on the
programming language, right? Or are you talking about Python? C plus plus? Are you talking
about multi take Turing machines? So we're going to, for now we're just going to leave
that slowdown has a parameter. We're going to define S of t. For the programming
language we care about to be the number of steps
required to simulate the steps of a program
using an interpreter written in the same
programming language, right? So for Turing machines is
not that hard to show. S of t is o of t squared that
one Turing machine can suit, you know, it can be
given the description of another and simulate it. And there's a quadratic slow down. Someone not a very non-obvious proof shows
that in fact that can be reduced to o of t log t for
to take turning Michigan's. For programming
languages like Python, it tends to be the case that this is sort of
special tutoring machines. So this is one of the reasons that I only like to
use Turing machines as the model when it seems
like we need that formalism. But when we're just
talking about programming, there's a few things they
do that are a little awkward compared to regular
programming languages. And this is one of them that you have this inherent simulation overhead. For most programming languages, S of t is the right. I can the Python interpreter. For each basic step
in a Python program, it takes a constant number of
steps of the interpreter to do it. So for most programming languages, S of T is 0 if TV, but the big O constant
is bigger than 1, right? So for these languages, because the big O is
kind of disappear in the definition of this
deterministic time glass. Time of S of T of n is the
same as time of T of n. Now, that's not the only thing
that has to happen. We do have to simulate p
of p for this many steps, but we have to know, well, what
did we reach that many steps? Even if you did have this
lightening fast simulation, it's just like real time one step of this algorithm
for every step of P, The simulating algorithm
also has to set off an alarm clock that goes off
after t of n steps, right? So you do need a little time to actually like count how
many steps that we've done. And in particular to be
able to do that count in, in not too much extra time we need tend to be time constructable, right? It can't be some
crazy time-bound that takes way longer to compute
than the number it outputs. Okay, So with those sort
of ugly details in place, now we can formally state
this time hierarchy theorem. And this what tells us that
if you allow more time, you can actually solve more problems. So I'll state the more
complicated version that says, you know, if your
programming language has this function telling you
the simulation slow down. So it takes S of T steps
to simulate t steps of an arbitrary program while
running this alarm clocks. So that's all buried and S here. Then the theorem says, as long as t is time
constructable and g is strictly smaller,
it's a little o of t. Then the problems you can solve
in only g of n amount of time, or a strict subset of those you can solve in S of T of n amount of time. And that looks a little complicated, but the proof is
essentially that what we showed in that time lower
bound a few slides ago is that catch-22 is one of these problems in this bigger
set on the right here it's in, it's solvable in time
S of T of n, right? So we, we run p on input
peeve for, for t steps, our program doing that and takes S of that many steps to do it and see
what it does and then negate it. And we prove that it is not in time. G of n for any g is
strictly smaller than. Now, the corollary for most
programming languages, where S of T is just o of t, right? So not Turing machines. Language languages is just
the simpler thing to state, which is that you've got
to time bounds T and G, and G is strictly smaller. In that case, you can solve more problems with time T of
n than you can with time GDB. And you just have to get
a little ugly if you're talking about Turing
machines because they're simulation overhead is
a little bit bigger. So in particular, it means we
have this hierarchy of problems. We don't really consider
sub-linear time in this class, although that is a very
interesting subject, is called streaming algorithms that, that study sub-linear time. But the smallest one
we'll consider is linear. And we now know that
is a strict subset of problems solvable
in quadratic time. Those are a strict subset of problems solvable in just a little bit
more than quadratic time, like end the 2.1, which is a subset of problems
solvable in cubic time. And if we allowed
end of the 100 time, yet more problems will be solvable. So these are strict
containment there. And then that of course, is a strict subset of P because P contain things like
n to the 1 thousand. And that's a strict subset of time
t to time of n to the log of n, because p is defined by
n raised to a constant, but log of n grows faster
than any constant. But that itself is a strict subset of this two to the N time-bound, which is itself a strict subset
or two to the two n, right? Notice that there's a constant
here compared to here, but this, this is not
big O of this, right? Because this is essentially
this time-bound squared. And then you could put a
bigger constant there. And then you're going to
replace this linear polynomial in the exponent with a bigger
polynomial in the exponent. And that's all a subset of EXP. And then x is itself a subset of
problems solvable in time two to the two to the n. And that's a strict subset of the
so-called experts, which is, you replace this end
here with another polynomial.-e 

en-ECS 220 4c_6.3-4 P vs. NP vs. EXP nondeterministic time hierarchy theorem.txt

Okay, So remember that these, these are the first to
complexity classes. We talked about P and XP, and we've now talked a lot about NP. And we know P is
contained in NP and NP is contained in X because every NP problem is solvable
by exponential time, brute force search over
all the witnesses. And we know that P is
a strict subset of NP. So one of these two inclusions right here has got to be proper or strict. But we don't know which one. Probably both are, right? It's probably the case that there's the NP-complete problems
and problem and some others are not contained in P.
And it's also probably the case that there's problems
solvable in exponential time, but they aren't
necessarily NP problems. So here's an exercise to try it on. Let E be the so-called linear
exponential complexity class. So this is all the
exponential time mounds were the exponent in the
exponential is just a linear. So you don't allow like
say two to the n squared. So this is a strict subset of X. By the time hierarchy theorem, we can actually prove unconditionally
that NP is not equal to IE. So try to do that at home. We can talk about that
if you want to know how. Okay. Now does this last thing dimension. There is such a thing as a non-deterministic
time hierarchy theorem. So this is the end time of G is a strict subset of N time of
t If g is little o of t, right? So it's just the nondeterministic
version of this. And note the lack of a need talk about simulation overhead
in this version, even for Turing machines. So this is a little
more complicated to prove to get around that sort of simulation that
even Turing machines need. But this does hold. So we do also have that NP
is a strict subset of X, strict subset of and double XP. And we're not gonna talk much more about the non-deterministic
time hierarchy there. And I just wanted to
point out it does hold.-e 

